./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/sc/2023bcsc50.html
        
John Wendell Keyler is before this Court in respect of two charges. The first is that on July 7, 2020, at or near Taylor, British Columbia, he committed the second-degree murder of Sarah Foord. The second charge alleges that Mr. Keyler, on or about July 7, 2020, at or near Taylor, British Columbia, did improperly or indecently interfere with, or offer an indignity to, a dead human body or human remains, namely those of Sarah Foord.
        
Mr. Keyler has entered pleas of not guilty in respect of each of these charges. Following voir dires dealing with the admissibility of certain statements, a fairly abbreviated trial proceeded, by judge alone, over seven days at the end of October and into November 2022. 
        
The case for the Crown was substantially comprised of an Agreed Statement of Facts that was filed. In addition, two other witnesses were called by the prosecution. The defendant himself testified and called the evidence of four witnesses, two of whom were qualified as experts.
        
Following the submissions of counsel, judgment was reserved.
        
These are this Court’s reasons for judgement. 
The Circumstances 
        
In July 2020, Mr. Keyler and Ms. Foord were living together in a common law relationship. They were resident at her house, a mobile home, located in Taylor, British Columbia. At the time, Ms. Foord was 38 years of age; Mr. Keyler was 35 years old.
        
My understanding is that they had been in a romantic relationship for approximately 16 months. 
        
Mr. Keyler was primarily employed in the oil and gas industry, working at plants and properties in the general area. In March 2020, he was laid off and was collecting Employment Insurance benefits. Ms. Foord was a cook by vocation and worked, at least part time, at a pub in Taylor. 
        
The evidence indicates that they were both using drugs and drinking to a significant extent during their relationship. 
      In terms of the actual events giving rise to the charges, I will summarize from the statement of admissions: 
•        
During the early morning hours of July 7, 2020, at the residence in Taylor, Mr. Keyler wounded Ms. Foord by stabbing her with the blade of a multitool. 
•        
On July 7, 2020, Mr. Keyler transported the body of Ms. Foord, together with various other items taken from the residence, to a gas well-site location near Buick Creek, British Columbia, where he buried her body in the bush adjacent to the cleared portion of the well-site, and left the other items in the bush nearby. 
•        
After burying the body of Ms. Foord, Mr. Keyler went to a small body of water a short distance away and threw the multitool with which he had stabbed her into the water. 
•        
On July 21, 2020, Mr. Keyler made a non-custodial warned and recorded statement to members of the RCMP in which he confessed to committing the stabbing of Ms. Foord and to transporting and burying her body; he voluntarily directed and accompanied police to where he had buried her body.
•        
On July 24, 2020, Ms. Foord's body was exhumed and photographed by the police, and then removed to Vernon Jubilee Hospital where it was held for autopsy. 
•        
On July 25, 2020, after being charged with and arrested for the murder of Ms. Foord, Mr. Keyler made a further statement to police, again confessing to having committed the stabbing of Ms. Foord and transporting her body and burying it at the well-site. 
•        
An autopsy was conducted on July 29, 2020, by Dr. Jason Doyle. That process included drawing blood samples which were submitted for analysis to the RCMP National Forensic Laboratory. •        
On July 29, 2020, RCMP divers searched the water where Mr. Keyler said he had thrown the multitool; police recovered the multitool and seized it. 
•        
Forensic examination identified the DNA of Ms. Foord on the multitool.
      The laboratory analysis of Ms. Foord's blood detected the presence of cocaine, together with chemical metabolites which are associated to cocaine. As well, the prescription opioid methadone was found to be present in her blood. 
      No evidence of the scene of the stabbing was adduced at trial. Based upon the statements and testimony of Mr. Keyler, I conclude that there was a significant bloodletting event in the bathroom of the trailer, that the toilet seat was broken, and that some shelving units from that room were displaced and knocked to the floor in the course of events there. 
      The autopsy findings are set out in Dr. Doyle's report. Stated summarily, he found that Ms. Foord had suffered multiple sharp force injuries (approximately 50), predominantly to the right side of her body, including injuries to the right side of the face, neck, chest, abdomen, and right shoulder, and to both hands and arms. Many of the injuries he found were described as very superficial and did not result in any significant underlying injury. However, two stab wounds of particular significance were identified: these two stab wounds, to the right side of the torso, penetrated the right hemithorax (right chest cavity), resulting in a 400 millilitre hemothorax (blood in the right chest cavity), secondary predominantly to injury to the ninth intercostal vessels (under the ninth rib). He also noted blunt force trauma evidenced by a hemorrhage resulting in a black eye, but without underlying fractures. In conclusion, Dr. Doyle found the cause of death to be multiple stab wounds, with the two wounds that penetrated the right hemithorax as the most significant, and accounting for death. 
Defence Evidence
      As noted, Mr. Keyler adduced the evidence of four witnesses and testified himself. 
      In his testimony, Mr. Keyler described an event which occurred in September 2019. He said that he and Ms. Foord were hunting in a rural area around Fort St. John. He said they were drinking and using drugs; he described that he became upset and worried that individuals had been following them and were going to do harm to them. He also testified to the effect that his perception of those events was that Ms. Foord was somehow complicit in what was occurring and had “set him up”. 
      Two of the defence witnesses spoke to that event. One of the witnesses was a man on and near whose property these events occurred; he described Mr. Keyler having come to his place, seeking help. The second witness to this event was a police officer who had attended in response to a call. She described her observations of the circumstances and the state of Mr. Keyler. 
      Mr. Keyler also called two witnesses who were qualified to give opinion evidence. The first of these was Mr. W.K. Jeffery, a toxicologist, who testified particularly with respect to cocaine and its effect on persons who use it. He also spoke briefly as to the drug methadone. 
      The second expert witness called by the defence was Dr. Andrew Kolchak, whose specialty is forensic psychiatry. Dr. Kolchak conducted an extensive investigation of the circumstances, and his comprehensive report was filed as an exhibit at trial. In addition, he was cross-examined at some length by Crown counsel. 
Positions of the Parties The Crown
      Crown counsel submits that the evidence discloses a protracted, sustained and deliberate attack committed by Mr. Keyler on Ms. Foord. It is the position of the Crown that the extensive nature of the attack and the repeated thrusts of the weapon are highly probative of a persistent and specific intent to kill. The Crown says that the only reasonable inference to be drawn is that “Mr. Keyler either: a) inflicted, over such a protracted period of time, injuries of such number and magnitude – and directed to such vital regions of the body, specifically the head and abdomen – that his intent to cause the death of Ms. Foord is manifest; or b) intentionally inflicted so many injuries to Ms. Foord of such a kind and gravity that Mr. Keyler knew there was a substantial probability that the nature, magnitude and number of injuries would cause Ms. Foord's death and proceeded reckless of the actual consequences”.
      The Crown says that, to the extent Mr. Jeffery offered the conclusion that Mr. Keyler was in a state of cocaine intoxication, he has overstated the matter. The most Mr. Jeffery can say, contends the prosecutor, is that Mr. Keyler may have been intoxicated at some point after having consumed drugs and alcohol. 
      The Crown says that Mr. Keyler is not a particularly credible witness, and that his assertion that he does not remember inflicting all of the stab wounds to Ms. Foord, or that he does not know what intent he had, does not provide an answer with respect to the ultimate issue of intent. The Crown submits that there are a number of credibility problems arising from Mr. Keyler's evidence.
      The essence of the Crown’s position is that there can be no doubt that Mr. Keyler stabbed Ms. Foord approximately 50 times, that the evidence strongly suggests that there was a fight between the two principals in the bathroom, and that the reality is that there was significant animus borne by Mr. Keyler to Ms. Foord. 
      In all the circumstances, the Crown submits that Mr. Keyler's intent when he inflicted the wounds upon Ms. Foord is compellingly made out by the totality of the circumstances, and that this Court should find that intent to murder has been proven. 
      With respect to the matter of the indignity to human remains, neither Crown nor defence made submissions on this issue. Essentially, the defence concedes liability with respect to Count Two and accepts that the charge is proven. 
The Defence
      Mr. Keyler's submissions are focused upon the issue of proof of intent. Mr. Keyler contends that he was in a state of significant intoxication by alcohol and drugs, such that it would be improper for this Court to examine the issue through the so called common sense inference.
      Instead, Mr. Keyler submits that, based upon his own testimony and that of Dr. Kolchak, there is another reasonable inference to be drawn, namely that Mr. Keyler was in a psychotic state due to substance induced psychosis at the time of the events. In support of this proposition, Mr. Keyler points to a number of observations and findings by Dr. Kolchak, including that: 
a)    Based upon Mr. Keyler’s self-report, he was at the material time likely intoxicated with stimulant(s) and alcohol; b)    Mr. Keyler, on the basis of his reported persecutory beliefs, manifested by suspiciousness and misinterpreting his environment as threatening, likely qualifies for a diagnosis of Stimulant Induced Psychotic Disorder; and c)    it is possible that Mr. Keyler at the material time developed at least some symptoms of psychosis (to an unknown degree) and therefore qualifies for a diagnosis of Substance Induced Psychotic Disorder. 
      Mr. Keyler emphasizes two propositions for the Court to bear in mind in the course of its analysis: that the post-offence conduct (that is, the disposal of Ms. Foord's remains) is not an appropriate basis from which to infer intent as required for the charge of murder; and that Mr. Keyler’s criminal record, as adduced in the course of his cross-examination, cannot be used by the Court to infer bad character or propensity to commit criminal offences.
Analysis and Discussion
      At the outset, it is important to make clear that, in light of Mr. Keyler’s concession that the second count is proven, my comments will focus on the issues raised by Count One, the charge of murder. However, I will deal briefly and summarily with the second count before proceeding to the more contentious matters.
      The Crown alleges that, contrary to s. 182(b) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 [Code], the accused offered an indignity to the human remains of Ms. Foord by placing her body in a garbage can, transporting it to a remote site and then burying her in a shallow grave.
      In order to prove the accused guilty of this offence, the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt the following essential elements, in addition to date and place: (a) the accused knew that Ms. Foord was dead; (b) the accused interfered with Ms. Foord’s human remains; (c) the interference was improper or indecent; and (d) the accused intended to improperly or indecently interfere with her remains: R. v. Caissie, 2019 SKQB 3 at para. 121, aff’d 2022 SKCA 48. 
      In addition to the defence concession, I find those elements are made out by the evidence.
      With that issue addressed, I turn now to the points of dispute in this case. Applicable Legal Principles and Concepts
      There are three particular legal principles that have application to the deliberation process for this indictment. One is comprised of the broad and overarching principles that are foundational to our criminal trial process. Another is of central importance to this case because it prescribes the manner in which a trial court must deal with circumstantial evidence. The latter is especially critical here because the Crown’s case against Mr. Keyler, as it pertains to the issue of intent, is essentially circumstantial. The third pertains to how the Court must deal with the statements and testimony of the accused.
      Following that, I will set out the specific legal principles that apply in respect of the charge of murder. Fundamental Principles
      I commence with a statement of principles that will guide this Court's deliberation and that must be applied in the determination of verdict. Those are as follows: a)    The defendant is presumed to be innocent unless and until this Court is satisfied that the Crown has proven his guilt to the standard of proof beyond a reasonable doubt; b)    The onus of proof lies upon the Crown; there is no obligation on the defendant to call evidence or to prove anything; and c)    The criminal standard of proof beyond a reasonable doubt will apply in respect of each element of the offence charged or any included offence. Any doubt on any element must be resolved in favour of the defendant. Unless the Crown proves all of the essential elements of the offence charged or any included offence, a verdict of “not guilty” must result. 
Circumstantial Evidence
      Where the evidence in a case is circumstantial, the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused’s guilt is the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence as a whole: R. v. Villaroman, 2016 SCC 33 at para. 35. If there are reasonable explanations other than guilt, the Crown has not met the burden of proof: Villaroman at para. 35. 
      While the trier of fact must consider other “plausible theories” and “reasonable possibilities” inconsistent with guilt, this applies to the extent that these alternative theories are not speculative, and are “based on logic and experience applied to the evidence or absence of evidence”: Villaroman at para. 37. 
      The burden of proof placed on the Crown does not require proof beyond a reasonable doubt of every individual piece of circumstantial evidence: R v. Collin, 2008 BCCA 431 at para. 17. Rather, circumstantial evidence must be examined in its totality, assessing the cumulative effect of all the evidence to determine whether the essential elements have been proven: Cote v. The King, (1941) 1941 CanLII 348 (SCC), 77 C.C.C. 75 (S.C.C.), at para. 3.
       When faced with circumstantial evidence, the core question posed to the trier is whether the evidence, “viewed logically and in light of human experience, is reasonably capable of supporting an inference other than [guilt]”: Villaroman at para. 38. 
Statements of the Defendant
            
One other criminal law rule to be applied concerns statements made by an accused person.
            
A fundamental feature of the criminal trial process, and one which is essentially related to the principle of reasonable doubt, has to do with the manner in which a trial court will treat such statements. The approach is often referred to as an application of the rule in R. v. W.(D.), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 742.
            
A practical formulation of the principle is as follows: 
•        
If, as the trier of fact, I believe the evidence of the accused, denying responsibility for the offence, I must acquit. 
•        
If I do not believe the evidence of the accused, denying responsibility for the offence, but I am left with a reasonable doubt by it, I must acquit. 
•        
Even if I do not believe the evidence of the accused, denying responsibility for the offence, I must still ask whether, on the basis of the evidence which I do accept, I am convinced beyond a reasonable doubt by that evidence of the guilt of the accused. 
•        
There has come to be a fourth aspect of the approach, which I include in my frame of analysis and consider applicable: if, after a careful consideration of all of the evidence, I am unable to decide whom to believe, the defendant must be acquitted.
            
In the matter at bar, the defendant has testified at trial and there are a number of statements in evidence that he made, either denying or standing at variance with his guilt in respect of Count One. 
            
I acknowledge that any statement made by the defendant must be treated in this fashion, and, in my analysis, I will make further reference to that. The Law
            
The definition of murder in the Code, as relevant to the matter at hand, is set out in s. 229(a): 229 Culpable homicide is murder (a) where the person who causes the death of a human being (i) means to cause his death, or (ii) means to cause him bodily harm that he knows is likely to cause his death, and is reckless whether death ensues or not;
            
In order for the Crown to prove the murder charge against the defendant, it must satisfy the Court, beyond a reasonable doubt, of two principal elements: (1)  That the defendant unlawfully caused the death of the victim, (the actus reus); and (2)  that, at the time the defendant acted to cause the death: he either meant to cause the death of the victim or he meant to cause the victim bodily harm that he knew was likely to cause death, and was reckless as to whether death ensued or not (the mens rea). 
            
In these reasons, I may sometimes refer to the latter element as the requisite murderous intent, even though the word intent is not used in the Code provision. 
            
Also relevant to this case is the offence of unlawful act manslaughter, an offence not expressly defined in the Code. For practical purposes, it is a residual category of unlawful killing: an unlawful killing that is neither murder nor infanticide. Essentially, to prove guilt of manslaughter the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt two elements: that the accused caused the death of the victim and that the accused caused that death unlawfully. That second element of the offence is proven where the death is caused by an unlawful and dangerous act. An unlawful act is an act that is an offence under the law. With respect to the requirement that the act be dangerous, that is established if a reasonable person in the same circumstances would realize that the unlawful act would likely put another person at risk of bodily harm. Bodily harm means any hurt or injury that interferes with another person's health or comfort in something more than a brief or minor way. It is not necessary that the prosecution prove that a reasonable person would realize that the unlawful act would likely cause the death of that other person. 
            
The difference between the two offences is that murder requires the Crown to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant had the specific murderous intent as defined. 
            
Proof of unlawful act manslaughter does not require that the defendant intended or meant to cause the death of the victim. It is sufficient that the Crown establish the general intent required for the unlawful act. 
            
I make reference to the offence of manslaughter because, in the circumstances of the present case, it is a lesser included offence of the murder charge alleged against the defendant and it is relevant in the context of the defence submissions. 
            
For both murder and manslaughter, causation means that the defendant’s conduct contributed significantly to the death of the deceased.
      To secure a conviction for murder, the Crown must prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the defendant had either a subjective intent to cause Ms. Foord's death or that he intended to cause bodily harm knowing it likely would result in death and was reckless as to whether death ensued. In the matter at bar, the more plausible path to liability, as I understand it, is the second branch. The Crown says that, on the basis of the particular facts, the Court should infer the necessary intent.
     
Where the issue of intent involves intoxication, as in this case, a helpful starting point is the following excerpt from R. v. Florence, 2014 BCCA 288:
       … the leading case on intoxication as it applies to the specific intent for murder is R. v. Daley, 2007 SCC 53.
 In Daley, the Court set out the three legally relevant levels of intoxication.  On the one end, there is “mild” intoxication which cannot negate specific intent, and on the other end, there is extreme intoxication, where the accused is so intoxicated that he or she is incapable of forming specific intent.  Extreme intoxication is akin to automatism.
       The middle category of “advanced” intoxication is relevant here.  This occurs “where there is intoxication to the point where the accused lacks specific intent, to the extent of an impairment of the accused’s foresight of the consequences of his or her act sufficient to raise a reasonable doubt about the requisite mens rea”: Daley at para. 41.  In other words, the intoxication defence recognizes that alcohol may impair both one’s ability to act with intention or foresee the consequences of one’s actions.  Evidence that an accused had been consuming alcohol may prevent the Crown from relying on the common sense inference that a sane and sober person intends the probable consequences of his or her actions.
       However, the extent of intoxication required to negate specific intent may vary, depending on the type of offence involved.  As stated in Daley at para. 42, “for certain types of homicides, where death is the obvious consequence of the accused’s act, an accused might have to establish a particularly advanced degree of intoxication to successfully avail himself or herself of an intoxication defence of this type.”
      In some circumstances, the trier of fact may apply the common sense inference: that a sane and sober person intends the natural consequences of his actions. This, it should be noted, is a route of analysis that the trier of fact may (that is, permissive) apply; the trier is not obliged to apply it, and the concept is not properly described as a presumption.
      The proposition is simple but powerful. In most instances of human conduct, the notion that one intends the natural and logically predictable outcomes of one’s deliberate actions is quite compelling. However, the applicability of the “rule” is not without limitations.
     
There is one final observation I make with respect to the legal principles that this case presents. In the submissions provided by the Crown, at para. 25, in support of its contention that the Court should find the murder charge proven, and with reference to the matter of the defendant’s intoxication, the prosecutor says this: In any event, the law in Canada is that intoxication short of automatism is not a defence to the kind of violent crime at issue here: R. v. Brown [2022 SCC 18],  para. 5, per Kasirer, J. 
     
With great respect, I cannot agree that is legally, fully correct so as to have application to the murder charge. In Brown, the offence that the Supreme Court of Canada was considering – to which Justice Kasirer was referring – was aggravated assault, which is a general, not specific, intent offence. I suggest the distinction is made apparent in the sentence which follows the excerpt at para. 5: The outcome of the constitutional questions in these appeals has no impact on the rule that intoxication short of automatism is not a defence to violent crimes of general intent in this country. 
      My understanding is that, as explained in the excerpt from Florence quoted above, when there is intoxication to the point where the accused lacks specific intent to the extent of an impairment of the accused’s foresight of the consequences of his or her act sufficient to raise a reasonable doubt about the requisite mens rea, that may give rise to an intoxication defence to a specific intent offence but not a general intent offence.
      In the case at bar, such a defence could be available for the murder charge but not for the included offence of manslaughter, a general intent offence. Analysis Preliminary Comments
      I propose now to examine the central issue that this case presents: has the Crown established that, when Mr. Keyler stabbed and killed Ms. Foord, he had the intent necessary to prove that the act was murder, or does the proof of that element fall short of the requisite high standard, such that a conviction for manslaughter must be the result?
      To provide a more specific context for that issue, it may be helpful to set out the position urged upon the Court by Mr. Keyler. He says that there is a real doubt about the proof of specific intent because there is a body of evidence tending to suggest the defendant, on account of his level of intoxication by alcohol and stimulant drugs (principally cocaine), was in a state of mind akin to a psychotic condition that clouded his thinking to the extent there is a reasonable doubt that he actually formed the specific intent necessary for murder.
      Before delving into the analysis, I wish to make a number of points. The first is that, in my discussion, I will make reference to the defendant’s state of mind. By that, I refer, somewhat compendiously, to his mindset generally, as well as the effects of substances (both alcohol and drugs – essentially degree of intoxication) in terms of not only commonplace criteria, such as impact upon judgement and disinhibition, but also more aberrant cognitive function, such as psychosis, which I understand to entail a difficulty in distinguishing between what is real and what is not real. 
      An individual under the influence of substances may act out in ways that are violent, angry and destructive because of diminished judgement and/or inhibition, but it does not follow that there is a reasonable doubt about that person’s intent to take certain action. Where there is a viable basis to find a state of active psychosis, the conclusion may be different. Obviously, critical considerations are the temporal connection between the state of mind and the actual event at issue and the apparent effect that the state of mind had upon the action taken. The focus must be with respect to the state of mind at the relevant time – not at large – and there must be reason to conclude there is an actual connection between the state of mind and the action taken.
      A second and related observation to be made is this: while there is evidence before this Court, most notably from Dr. Kolchak and, to a lesser extent, from Mr. Jeffery, about the effects of drugs, primarily cocaine although also, in a limited way, to alcohol, those opinions are, to some substantial degree, general and theoretical. They describe known effects of intoxication by those substances – what conditions are typically or sometimes observed related to use. Dr. Kolchak’s evidence purports to provide a somewhat greater degree of insight into Mr. Keyler’s state of mind. That aspect of his opinion is quite significantly informed by his interviews with Mr. Keyler, and so the Court’s assessment of Dr. Kolchak’s opinion is necessarily impacted by the recognition that what Mr. Keyler told Dr. Kolchak may not be entirely reliable or consistent with what he has said and done on other occasions. Caution is thus warranted. However, in the final analysis, while I must certainly consider the evidence of those two witnesses, neither has the ability to speak definitively to the issue I am concerned with, Mr. Keyler’s state of mind at the time of the stabbings.
      A third point is that, although Mr. Keyler, in his trial testimony, seems to “hedge his bet” to some degree in that he does not fully and unqualifiedly admit that he caused all the injuries to Ms. Foord, I have no reservations in that regard. I am satisfied that there is no other reasonable conclusion but that he inflicted all the stab injuries, both the more superficial ones and the two that have been identified as life-threatening and which, I find, caused her death. That he says he has no memory of causing all the wounds – claiming a blackout, if you will – certainly standing alone and without more, does not absolve him of responsibility for those actions.
      A final point to be made is that this is not a case where the issue of non-insane automatism – referred to above in Florence at para. 20, as “extreme intoxication akin to automatism” – is posed as a possible outcome. Both the Crown and Mr. Keyler are ad idem on that and, in my view, properly so. Evidence bearing on the intent issue 
      The evidence of primary relevance on this issue is comprised of the defendant's trial testimony and the statements he made to the police and which have been tendered by the Crown, and the evidence of two defence witnesses, Mr. Jeffrey and Dr. Kolchak. I consider Mr. Keyler’s evidence to be of central importance to the determination. As well, as I will explain, the reports and testimony of Mr. Jeffery and Dr. Kolchak have also informed my analysis. 
      I have examined the evidence of Mr. Keyler carefully and will review it in some detail. I will begin with a general description of his evidence and will make further reference to specific portions later in my analysis. I will also review the evidence of Dr. Kolchak and Mr. Jeffery. The Evidence of Mr. Keyler
      Mr. Keyler testified as to his background. He described a fairly uneventful upbringing. He said that he did not begin drinking until his late teens and began to use cocaine a short time later, once he was in the workforce, which I understand to have been around the age of 19. 
      The defendant met Ms. Foord in early 2019. At the time, Mr. Keyler was primarily employed in the oil and gas drilling industry which was active in the North Peace area. Evidently that work is somewhat seasonal. Within a very short time, the two became involved in a romantic relationship and Mr. Keyler moved into Ms. Foord's residence in Taylor in April or May 2019. 
      The defendant testified with respect to an event that occurred in September 2019. He said that on September 26, he and Ms. Foord went on a hunting trip. They were driving around, using drugs and drinking. At some point, according to Mr. Keyler, he believed they were being followed. They were in a rural area and ran out of gas. He told of getting out of the vehicle and going to a nearby farmhouse to try and get gas. He also described that the vehicle which he believed was following them contained three or four persons, “brown men”, and he said that he was fearful of them. He stated that Ms. Foord was with him for part of this event and that she acted in a way that caused him to think she was adverse to him. He also testified that he thought he had been stabbed or shot. 
      In the spring of 2020, Mr. Keyler and Ms. Foord were living at her trailer residence in Taylor. Mr. Keyler testified that he had been laid off from his employment in around March, and that they were subsisting on Employment Insurance benefits, some COVID payments, and the money Ms. Foord was earning working at a bar in Taylor. 
      With respect to this time, and particularly drug use, the defendant initially testified that he and Ms. Foord were “using and drinking occasionally”. In fact, as his testimony advanced, he explained that he was using cocaine and alcohol as a sort of “balance” and also using methadone powder to calm his anxiety. He described that their combined use was in the range of 3 to 5 grams per day (cocaine) and that they also used alcohol fairly heavily. In addition, he said they were using marijuana occasionally and also using crystal methamphetamine.
      Mr. Keyler described what I understood to be a pattern of increasing drug use. He said that by early July, they were using “lots”, bingeing and sleeping erratically. More generally, he indicated that, with respect to the relationship between himself and Ms. Foord, it was a stressful time. He said there were money issues, and dissension in their relationship with respect to her circle of friends, particularly a man named Cody Powell. Mr. Keyler testified that he felt these other persons were playing too large a role in their (his and Ms. Foord's) life as a couple, and he had a feeling that Mr. Powell particularly was trying to split them up. In describing the state of their relationship (his and Ms. Foord’s), he used the word dysfunctional. 
      Mr. Keyler testified in some detail respecting the events of July 6; he related that he and Ms. Foord bought liquor that day, some 24 Budweiser beer and a 24 pack of coolers as well as a 26 ounce bottle of vodka. He also said that in the afternoon, he and Ms. Foord travelled to the nearby community of Charlie Lake where they purchased cocaine from their dealer: they bought 5 grams, for $300 or $400 and also 2.5 grams of methadone. He later clarified that this purchase had been “on cuff”, that the dealer had allowed them credit and they would pay later.
      The defendant said that he and Ms. Foord were using the drugs and consuming alcohol through the day. He said by midnight, they had run out of drugs and had gone back to Charlie Lake to purchase a further 4 to 5 grams of cocaine and they also got one further gram of methadone. Evidently they were able to access funds at a bank machine after midnight, and so were able to pay the dealer.
      He testified that they had returned to their trailer by approximately 1:00 a.m. and that the drinking and drug use continued. He also said that in the course of this time, that is late on July 6, and into the early morning of July 7, they received some text messages from Mr. Powell. That was a source of conflict between the two. He said they were arguing and yelling at each other. 
      After their return, around 1:00 a.m., he said that they were “chilling” in the bathroom, by which I understand him to mean they were in the bathroom using drugs. Mr. Keyler said that he began to feel uncomfortable: he said he was feeling nauseous and felt “cornered”. 
      His testimony is that, while in the bathroom, he had taken the contents of his pockets and some of the drugs and put those items on the counter adjacent to the basin. Among the items that he had placed there was his Leatherman multitool which he said he usually carried with him. 
      The defendant said that they had been listening to music. He testified that after the music stopped, he began to hear things and thought something was “going on”. Specifically, he thought there were people in or under the house. He claims he heard noises that were “like people crawling under the house”. 
      Mr. Keyler said that, in his state of mind, he wanted Ms. Foord to come closer to him, to take his hand. He testified that he had taken the Leatherman and extended the blade and was carrying it in his right hand to “protect himself”. He also testified that he thought Ms. Foord had “set him up" and that she wanted to get somebody to kill him. His testimony is that, while both of them were in the bathroom, and he was standing nearest the tub, he pulled her towards him. He said she resisted and called him a “piece of shit”. He persisted in physically trying to draw her near – he grabbed her and pulled her into the tub with him. He also described that he pulled down the shower curtain to “cover us, hide us” from persons that he thought were trying to get into the bathroom. He explained his reasoning as essentially this: if Ms. Foord was with him, he would feel protected. The defendant said that he was seeing things, specifically that he saw a lion after shutting off the light. He also testified that there was a shaving cream bottle in the shower and that he saw a camera lens on it. 
      Mr. Keyler described the struggle as he pulled Ms. Foord into the tub. He said he remembered holding and hugging her and stabbing her, poking her in the back a few times. When asked why he did that, he said he did not know and did not want to, other than that he was trying to protect himself; he felt that if she was near, nothing would happen to him. He said he thought she had set him up and that people were going to kill him. 
      Mr. Keyler said that he then blacked out. His next memory was waking up in the tub; it was half full of water and he was trying to get the shower curtain off himself. He said Ms. Foord was on the floor, on her back, with her foot resting on the edge of the tub. He described that the taps were running. He said he did not turn them on and does not know who did. 
      Mr. Keyler testified that his last recollection of these events before he woke up was sometime between 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. He said he woke up the following morning between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. in the tub. Ms. Foord was on the floor; he tried to wake her but she was not responsive. He went into the bedroom to have a cigarette. He changed his clothes and snorted some cocaine and said he came to realize that Ms. Foord was dead. After a time, he retrieved a garbage can from outside and put her body in it, then put it in his truck. He testified that he wiped down the bathroom with towels. His description was that there was a lot of blood on the bathroom walls, and that he found a broken toilet seat and also saw that a rack in the bathroom had been pulled down. 
      Mr. Keyler testified that he subsequently drove his truck to an oil and gas lease site in the area of Buick Creek. He said he pulled into the clearing and left the garbage can with Ms. Foord's remains there, near some trees. He then described returning to town, buying gas, cigarettes and cocaine, then going to the residence in Taylor where he got some clothes, some personal items and a shovel. He returned to the lease site, to where the garbage can was located. He testified that he dug a hole and placed Ms. Foord's remains in there. 
      Mr. Keyler was quite adamant in his testimony that he saw no stab wounds on Ms. Foord's body in the morning and that he observed no blood on her nor wounds to her hands or her face. He did testify that there was blood on the bathroom wall but he attributes that to a cut on his own hand. 
      Mr. Keyler testified as to the details of leaving the body in the shallow grave, disposing of certain items including his Leatherman and the shovel and how he eventually left the Peace area and travelled by truck to Surrey by way of Alberta. After a number of days in the lower mainland, he returned to the Fort St. John and Dawson Creek area. 
      On July 21, he went to the police station in Fort St. John. A noncustodial statement was taken by the investigators. On July 25, he was arrested and provided the police with a second statement. 
      At trial, Mr. Keyler was asked why he concealed Ms. Foord's death. His answer was to the effect that the reason was to buy himself some time and, I gather, to come to some acceptance of what had happened. He was asked whether he intended to kill Ms. Foord. He said he did not nor did he intend to cause her bodily harm. His testimony is that at the time of the event, he was very intoxicated. On a scale of 1 to 10, with 10 being a point where one cannot move, he rated himself at 9.5. 
      In summary, he said “I was so drunk and high I did not know what was going on.”
      The cross-examination was thorough and probing.
      In the course of that, it became more clearly apparent that there were serious problems in the relationship between Ms. Foord and the defendant, such that there was open and active hostility between them in the time before she died.
      A number of points were developed in the cross-examination, including the fact that the defendant was quite troubled by the presence of Cody Powell in the relationship. Specifically, Mr. Keyler agreed that he had told the police that it might be that events with Ms. Foord were brought to a head by a discussion they had concerning Mr. Powell and Mr. Powell having contacted Mr. Keyler to ask about a pornographic film that the defendant had been watching. Mr. Keyler described Mr. Powell as someone he considered “shady” and agreed with the suggestion of Crown counsel that he suspected Mr. Powell was somehow surveilling him by spying on his (the defendant's) TV. 
The Evidence of Dr. Kolchak 
      Dr. Kolchak prepared a thorough and detailed report. It is apparent that he spent considerable time reviewing all of the material that was available to him, and that included accessing a number of interviews with persons who did not testify at trial, as well as a detailed interview of Mr. Keyler. 
      A number of his material observations are set out below: 
•        
After providing a fairly thorough description of his personal background, Mr. Keyler described returning to the Fort St. John area in 2019 and meeting Sarah Foord. He described that they became involved in a relationship and that the lifestyle of that relationship was substantially one of drinking alcohol and using drugs, particularly cocaine and some crystal methamphetamine (according to his telling, that was particularly a drug of choice for Ms. Foord). •        
Mr. Keyler said that cocaine had a calming effect for him and caused him to be relaxed and countered his feelings of anxiety. He self-reported that he was prone to experiencing anxiety, some situational depression and paranoia. 
•        
Generally, Mr. Keyler reported to Dr. Kolchak that his relationship with Sarah Foord was “good”.  
•        
Mr. Keyler described an incident that occurred in September 2019, when he and Ms. Foord were hunting. He said that he thought people were after him and that Ms. Foord was “setting him up”. He also described feeling jealousy with respect to her friend Cody Powell. 
•        
Mr. Keyler reported that he experienced heightened anxiety and paranoia from time to time, but denied any hallucinations. Mr. Keyler specifically said that he was concerned that other persons were spying on him and as something of a consequence, he began to carry a Leatherman knife. He also described that he experienced sleep difficulties when he was using cocaine and alcohol. 
•        
Mr. Keyler said that in the early summer of 2020, both he and Ms. Foord were using cocaine on an increasing basis. 
•        
With respect to the actual stabbing event, Mr. Keyler said that he and Ms. Foord had been drinking and using crystal methamphetamine; he said that had been going on for a few days. He said that they bought drugs when their checks cleared and he estimated that, on the day of the stabbing (and, as I understand, in the time shortly preceding), they spent some $800 on drugs, namely cocaine and methadone. He reported that they were using drugs in the bathroom of the home; he described feeling paranoid and agitated. He said he had his drug gear on the counter and at some point, felt someone was coming in because he heard noises outside. He said he thought something was going to happen to him and so he pulled Ms. Foord into the bathtub with him. He described that there was a struggle, while he had the knife in his hand. Specifically, he told Dr. Kolchak that he thought Ms. Foord was trying to “set him up”. In initial his description to Dr. Kolchak, Mr. Keyler made no mention of stabbing Ms. Foord. Instead, he said he woke up in the morning; he said he was in the tub and the water was running and Ms. Foord was on the floor. Mr. Keyler told Dr. Kolchak that it was the morning, after he awoke, that he remembered that he had been holding Ms. Foord and remembered a stabbing motion while he was holding her in a bear hug. 
•        
Mr. Keyler said that he spent a couple of hours thinking about this situation. He then brought a garbage can into the trailer, put Ms. Foord in it and then cleaned up the scene. He said that in the morning, he was not fearful for his life. 
•        
Mr. Keyler said that after a time, he was consuming more drugs and went on the run. 
      Dr. Kolchak testified that, at the time of his interview and examination of Mr. Keyler, he found Mr. Keyler’s mental state to be quite unremarkable and noted no indication of any psychiatric issues. 
      Dr. Kolchak concluded that there are four diagnoses that apply, or likely apply, to Mr. Keyler: 1.    A Stimulant Use Disorder (cocaine and crystal methamphetamine); he characterizes that disorder as severe, but finds it was in remission at the time of examination (I note that, at the time of the interview, Mr. Keyler was being held in custody, on remand, and had been in that status for approximately two years). 2.    An Alcohol Use Disorder, again in remission at the time of the examination. 3.    Dr. Kolchak notes that Mr. Keyler reports a history of substance induced psychotic symptoms that occur in circumstances of prolonged and more extreme intoxication. Evidently, those disappear when Mr. Keyler is not using stimulant drugs or alcohol. Dr. Kolchak notes that Mr. Keyler says he develops persecutory beliefs, suspiciousness and misinterprets his environment as threatening while he is intoxicated, especially for protracted periods of time (several hours or more). Dr. Kolchak found no evidence of non-substance induced psychotic disorder, and he therefore concluded that Mr. Keyler likely qualifies for a diagnosis of Stimulant Induced Psychotic Disorder. 
[Emphasis added.] 4.    Dr. Kolchak also concludes that Mr. Keyler qualifies for a diagnosis of Antisocial Personality Disorder.
      Dr. Kolchak was invited to offer his opinion with respect to the possible presence of mental disorder at the time of the offence. He concluded, based upon his interviews with the defendant, that on a balance of probabilities, it is likely that Mr. Keyler was intoxicated with stimulants such as crystal methamphetamine and alcohol at the time of the offence, and therefore qualified for a diagnosis of Stimulant Intoxication and Alcohol Intoxication.
   Dr. Kolchak also opined that, based upon Mr. Keyler’s report that he had experienced what appeared to be symptoms of psychosis which manifested with paranoia and feelings that his life was in danger some time around the offence, and particularly his claim that he heard sounds and was suspicious that Sarah Foord was potentially somehow involved with “perceived perpetrators”, and given that stimulants and crystal methamphetamine are well known to cause psychosis both during the time of intoxication and even beyond the period of intoxication, it is “possible, on Mr. Keyler's report, that he developed at least some symptoms of psychosis (to an unknown degree) and therefore qualified for the presence of Substance Induced Psychotic Disorder at the material time”. Dr. Kolchak considers it unlikely that Mr. Keyler was suffering from any psychotic illness independent of the substance abuse intoxication. 
   Dr. Kolchak also offered what he described as an alternative hypothesis. That hypothesis includes the fact that Mr. Keyler is known to be struggling with anger and control while managing his intimate relationships, that he has clear antisocial traits that contribute to violent behaviour, and that there was a long-standing conflict between Mr. Keyler and Ms. Foord founded in jealousy; accordingly, it is possible that the defendant was angry and subsequently violent toward Ms. Foord outside his reported psychotic experiences. In other words, one available alternative to consider is that what occurred was based on domestically related violence. 
   Finally, Dr. Kolchak offered the view that “it is also possible that Mr. Keyler's actions at the time of the offence were driven by a combination of triggers combined from both hypotheses described.” 
   Dr. Kolchak was also invited to opine on the question of whether Mr. Keyler was aware of his actions at the time and his ability to form intent. 
   The first of these issues is a matter that I consider that Dr. Kolchak may opine upon; the second is certainly, in part at least, a legal issue and I do not consider it to be appropriate for his opinion to be considered as determinative. 
   With respect to the former, Dr. Kolchak stated that he considered it more likely than not that Mr. Keyler was aware of his actions and his environment at the time, independent of whether he was interpreting it correctly or in the context of psychosis. 
   He offered no opinion as to whether Mr. Keyler appreciated the consequences of his actions. Finally, I observed that Dr. Kolchak notes, quite appropriately, that much of the history upon which he relies was as provided by the defendant and was not supported by independent corroborative information. 
   I wish to make certain observations with respect to the evidence of Dr. Kolchak.
   In the course of preparing his report, he took into account information from a number of collateral sources, including statements that the police obtained in their investigation from persons who knew the defendant and Ms. Foord. In his report, Dr. Kolchak referred to that information. Some of it reflects badly on the character and history of Mr. Keyler. Specifically, some of those witnesses describe what they claim to have observed and concluded about the relationship.
   The concern is that none of those persons testified at trial; in fact, I am not certain that they would have been permitted to give that type of evidence if they had been called to the stand.
   This is not intended as a criticism of Dr. Kolchak or trial counsel. It is a reasonable expectation that Dr. Kolchak will take his obligation as an expert witness seriously and do his best to take into account information he reasonably considers to be relevant. In fact, I was favourably impressed by Dr. Kolchak. I conclude that he did his best to be fair and even-handed in formulating his opinions and providing his evidence.
   The point I make is this: I am cognizant of the concern that evidence of this type can cause trial unfairness and I have taken care to disregard the particular statements he referenced in his report in order to ensure that evidence prejudicial to the defendant is not improperly considered in my deliberations. The Evidence of Mr. Jeffery
   The Court also received the evidence of Mr. Jeffery. On the basis of his experience and training, he has a substantial expertise in the field of toxicology and he was qualified to testify as to his opinions. 
   Based upon the information with which he had been provided, and particularly the proposition that Mr. Keyler had been using high doses of cocaine and methadone in the days preceding, and on the day of, the incident, he expressed his opinion that Mr. Keyler was, at the relevant time, “intoxicated by cocaine”. As to the effects of that cocaine, particularly with respect to the possibility that there was a psychotic reaction, Mr. Jeffery simply notes that the effects of cocaine ingestion proceed as a continuum and he does not consider himself qualified to comment on the possibility that Mr. Keyler was in a state of cocaine psychosis. 
   Mr. Jeffery provided evidence with respect to a number of issues related to cocaine and cocaine abuse: 
•        
Cocaine is a popular drug of abuse because of its ability to rapidly produce an intense euphoria. It is a potent central nervous stimulant. 
•        
The effects of cocaine are directly related to the amount of cocaine administered and the method in which it is taken. •        
The effects of short-term low-dose cocaine on the Central Nervous System   are euphoria, alertness, a sense of well-being with excitement and a rapid flow of thoughts, postponement of physical and mental fatigue, decreased appetite, increased self-confidence, excitement, heightened alertness, talkativeness, increased speed of performance with hyperactivity, and decreased accuracy. 
•        
The effects of short-term high-dose use are agitation, anxiety, a feeling of grandeur, paranoia, hallucinations, acute psychotic reactions, rapid flight of ideas, feeling of grandiosity, bouts of seemingly meaningless behaviour, panic reactions and possibly paranoid psychosis. •        
The effects of long-term usage include panic attacks, various psychiatric problems, lack of concentration, dramatic mood swings, hypersensitivity to sensory stimuli, visual and auditory hallucination, sleep disorders, sexual dysfunction, and other physical conditions. 
•        
There is an observed link between cocaine use/abuse and violence. Specifically, it has been associated with anger, aggressiveness, hallucinations, delusions and other psychotic symptoms. 
•        
Cocaine intoxication is characterized by a number of symptoms, including hallucinations (auditory, visual and tactile), paranoia, possible confusion and possible bizarre and/or aggressive behaviour. 
•        
Cocaine psychosis is characterized by persecutory delusions, paranoia, hallucinations, extreme agitation, unpredictable, inappropriate and aggressive behaviour. Mr. Jeffery notes that an important distinctive feature about cocaine psychosis is that it does not disappear with the disappearance of the drug from the body and the symptoms may remain long after cocaine is metabolized; studies have found that the average duration of the psychotic episode was 16 days with a range of 1 to 60 days. 
•        
The effects of cocaine proceed on a continuum from euphoria, to dysphoria, paranoia, hallucinations to psychosis. The development and rate of progression of the stages is affected by prior mental disorders, frequency and method of use, and dose.
   Finally, Mr. Jeffery offered some comments with respect to methadone. He described that it is classified as a synthetic narcotic analgesic and that it is abused recreationally for its sedative and analgesic effects. Generally, as he describes the impact of methadone usage, it would seem that the general effect is one of lessening anxiety and aggressiveness; it manifests more in terms of the sedation or relaxation effect. 
   In terms of a bottom line conclusion, Mr. Jeffery would only say that it is his opinion that, based upon the information available to him, at the relevant time, Mr. Keyler was “intoxicated by cocaine”. He was not prepared to offer an opinion on the possibility that Mr. Keyler was in the state of cocaine psychosis. Observations
   Before I embark upon my analysis, there are at least two observations to make with respect to the evidence I have just reviewed.
   The first is that the principal thrust of the drug evidence is that Mr. Keyler was a heavy user of cocaine and that was the drug he was using at the time of the stabbing. In the evidence, particularly dealing with background, there is also reference to crystal methamphetamine. In the various statements made by Mr. Keyler, he has referred to using crystal methamphetamine in the past, to that drug being one favoured by Ms. Foord, and probably most notably, he told Dr. Kolchak that, “on the night of the offence, the couple was drinking and using crystal meth”. He said they were “using for a few days straight” prior to the day of the offence. That is not consistent with his trial testimony – in court he described using cocaine prior to the offence. He did not mention crystal methamphetamine other than to say they had used it in the past.
   That is obviously a discrepancy of at least some note, and I have reflected upon its significance. It does not engender confidence that Mr. Keyler is an especially reliable historian, that is true. Beyond that, I am not convinced it is a critical consideration. I note that the Crown elected not to pursue the point in cross-examination and does not specifically suggest in its submissions that this is an important matter. I recognize that, generally, both cocaine and crystal methamphetamine are somewhat similar in that each is a known stimulant. In Dr. Kolchak’s report, he seems to treat them in a similar way, including both in his reference to Stimulant Use Disorder.
   I also note that Mr. Keyler has made reference in his various statements and in his conversations with Dr. Kolchak to his “psychosis”. To be clear, I do not attach any truth value to such self-diagnosis, if that is how this might be described. Any meaningful consideration of the real or possible presence of psychosis or its role in the events, if any, is for the Court to determine, based upon appropriate expert evidence.
   Finally, there is the issue of the weight to be attached to the expert opinions. As for Dr. Kolchak, I am satisfied that his opinions as to the proposition that Mr. Keyler qualifies for a diagnosis of Stimulant Use Disorder and Alcohol Use Disorder, both currently in remission, are credible. More relevantly, his opinion that Mr. Keyler likely qualifies for a diagnosis of Stimulant Induced Psychotic Disorder, couched as it is by the qualification that it is “based on the defendant’s reports”, and premised on the condition that such psychosis will manifest during protracted periods of intoxication, is essentially worthy of serious consideration. I accept it as a reasonable possibility. 
   As for the opinion of Mr. Jeffery, my assessment of his evidence is that he principally provides a general overview of the symptoms and behavioural consequences of heavy use of cocaine as documented in authoritative academic sources. To the extent he relates those behaviours to the defendant, it is clearly premised on the condition that he has been provided with certain information, and his opinions as they relate to Mr. Keyler are thus conditional or hypothetical. I understand that and must of course weigh his evidence accordingly. His opinions concerning methadone are couched as statements that are based on generally accepted scientific and pharmaceutical findings and are not, as I understand them, intended to describe Mr. Keyler or his conduct. Discussion
   With that extensive preamble, I now turn to the analysis of how the evidence is to be interpreted and applied to the issue at bar.
   For the Crown to succeed in proving that the defendant committed murder, it must satisfy the Court that when he inflicted the stab wounds, he knew what he was doing and that he intended to inflict those stab wounds with the intention that Ms. Foord would die or that he was inflicting bodily harm that was so serious and dangerous that Ms. Foord would likely die as a result of that bodily harm, and he proceeded nevertheless. That consideration necessarily entails taking into account his state of mind at the time. 
   Earlier I made reference to the common sense inference. In this case, there is evidence that supports a finding that there was some degree of drug and alcohol intoxication present. Because this precludes the necessary assumption that the defendant was “sane and sober” at the time of the stabbing, I am not satisfied that it is appropriate to apply the common sense inference in this case. 
   That being so, the Court must consider all of the evidence, direct and circumstantial, that bears upon the issue of intent, and then draw an appropriate inference as to whether or not intent has been established. The question here is whether the Court can be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that, at the time he inflicted the stab wounds to Ms. Foord, the defendant understood what was going on and had a conscious intention to do what he did and was able to foresee the consequences of his actions. In my view, it is the question of whether the defendant understood what was going on that is critical here. 
   The evidence that bears upon the defendant's intent derives principally from his testimony. While Dr. Kolchak gave evidence that Mr. Keyler warrants diagnoses of severe Stimulant Use Disorder and Alcohol Use Disorder, and, in certain circumstances, may experience Stimulant Induced Psychosis, those are not conditions that are manifesting in conduct on an ongoing or constant basis: they may be active episodically. It bears emphasis that the focus of the Court's examination must be on the actual events and the defendant's state of mind at the time of the offence, not generalized psychiatric opinions of conditions he may be afflicted by. For the altered state of mind condition to raise a reasonable doubt as to intent, there must be a real and functional connection between the state of mind and a fair conclusion that the issue of intent is cast into doubt. 
   I do not, by any means, find the defendant to be a complete and unqualifiedly credible and reliable witness. He has shortcomings as an historian, and there are a number of inconsistencies between and among some of his tellings, more than minor. I have considered carefully the submissions of the Crown that quite forcefully urge this Court to assign little worth to Mr. Keyler’s evidence. There is undoubtedly merit to those submissions. However, while I have significant reservations as to the truthfulness and reliability of his evidence, I am not able to point to any aspect of his evidence and be satisfied that it is untrue. The parts of his testimony that are of most relevance (his state of intoxication and his state of mind, and the events leading up to the struggle with Ms. Foord in the bathroom and the stabbing itself) are matters regarding which his is the only evidence. As regards the proposition that he was experiencing symptoms akin to some of those associated to cocaine psychosis, while that arises principally from his testimony, I find the evidence of the hunting trip in September 2019 provides some support. 
   The perspective I must take, it seems to me, is to ask myself whether I reject it as being untrue or whether my scepticism is less absolute. Even though I am not satisfied that what he has said or parts of it are true, is it a situation where I should completely reject it out of hand, or is it such that I cannot say it is not capable of being true, and thus it must be assigned some partial weight in my assessment?
   I conclude that, on the matter of Mr. Keyler’s credibility, it is the latter approach I must take.
   Accordingly, in keeping with the principle underpinning R. v. W.(D.), I state certain findings of fact that I accept to be reasonably capable of being true: 
•        
In the weeks prior to the events of July 7, 2020, the defendant and Ms. Foord were drinking fairly heavily and using stimulant drugs (principally cocaine, also, to some extent, crystal methamphetamine) regularly and heavily. They were also using methadone powder from time to time. •        
In the weeks prior to the events of July 7, the defendant and Ms. Foord were experiencing significant conflict and tensions in their relationship stemming from a number of factors, including that the defendant was suspicious and jealous of Ms. Foord’s relationships with some of her longstanding friends. He did not feel that he was well accepted by some of those persons. •        
Through the day of July 6, and into the early morning hours of July 7, both the defendant and Ms. Foord were drinking substantial amounts of beer, liquor and alcoholic coolers and were consuming significant amounts of stimulant drugs, primarily cocaine, as well as some methadone powder. •        
By the early morning hours of July 7, they were at Ms. Foord’s home in Taylor; they had just resupplied themselves with cocaine and methadone and both were in a state of stimulant intoxication. The defendant was in a state of advanced intoxication. •        
The defendant, when he was in a state of advanced intoxication by stimulant, was sometimes subject to experiencing severe mental disturbance in the form of such phenomena as paranoia, a failure to accurately comprehend his environment and circumstances, delusions and hallucinations. 
•        
Sometime around 1:00 a.m. or later on July 7, the defendant was in the bathroom of Ms. Foord’s home with her. He began to experience mental disruptions that included a belief that persons were in or near the trailer and that they were going to harm him, and that Ms. Foord had some connection to those persons such that she could protect him from them. •        
In that state, the defendant, who had armed himself with a sharp-edged implement, a Leatherman tool, forced Ms. Foord to get into the bathtub with him, apparently so she could protect him. She resisted and there was a struggle. In the course of the struggle, the defendant inflicted a significant number of stab wounds to Ms. Foord, resulting in her death.
   The Crown is sceptical of the defendant's claims of mental disruption. It takes the position that what occurred is that the defendant was angry, jealous and hostile to Ms. Foord, and he gave vent to those emotions, possibly under the disinhibiting and aggressive effects of some mild intoxication by substance. He lashed out at her with his Leatherman, stabbing her repeatedly in vital areas of her body, such that he must be taken to have realized that the harm he was inflicting was likely to cause her serious bodily harm that could well result in her death, and was completely reckless as to that outcome.  
   On the other hand, the defendant contends it is reasonable to find that he was in a state of advanced intoxication brought on by having consumed significant quantities of alcohol and stimulant drugs, primarily cocaine; that he perceived that he was going to be attacked by some unknown persons while he was in the bathroom; that he believed that Ms. Foord was somehow part of the threat to him and that grabbing her and holding her near would protect him, and that he stabbed her repeatedly in the fog of that confused and disrupted state of mind.
   Dr. Kolchak posited two possible scenarios that are consistent with these two theories. In the first, there was significant psychological disruption that caused the defendant not to have the necessary appreciation of his circumstances and ability to foresee consequences. In the second, Dr. Kolchak accepted that what occurred here may have been intentional and is the result of the defendant’s anger, jealousy and animosity toward Ms. Foord and did not entail a component of psychosis. As well, Dr. Kolchak offered the opinion that this might be a situation where features of both those scenarios contributed to what happened. 
   Dr. Kolchak may well be right in that regard. I cannot determine the answer with certainty. 
   I am unable to say that either theory is correct or incorrect. Ultimately, I cannot discount the reasonable possibility that the defendant was experiencing effects akin to psychosis arising from his state of cocaine and alcohol intoxication. I therefore have a doubt that he understood the true circumstances as they existed at the time he stabbed Ms. Foord. In accordance with Villaroman, the proposition that Mr. Keyler acted on a distorted perception of reality is a reasonable possibility. It is therefore an alternative to the conclusion the Crown urges; it is, in my view, a reasonably possibility, certainly more than speculative. 
   In the result, I conclude that the Crown has not proven beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant had the requisite specific intent for a murder conviction to be entered. 
Conclusion
   In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the general intent necessary to find the defendant guilty of unlawful act manslaughter by having committed an assault upon Ms. Foord with a weapon is proven; the specific intent required to prove the charge of murder is not made out. I find Mr. Keyler guilty of manslaughter in respect of the death of Ms. Foord.
  
With respect to Count Two, I find Mr. Keyler guilty of the offence of offering an indignity to the human remains of Ms. Foord. 
