./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/sc/2023bcsc106.html
        
The accused, Angeline Marie Morris, is charged by way of indictment, that “on or about the 6th day of January, 2021, at or near Kamloops, in the Province of British Columbia, [she] did possess a loaded prohibited firearm without being the holder of an authorization or a licence and registration certificate for the firearm, contrary to Section 95(1) of the Criminal Code.”
        
She is also charged with three counts of possessing controlled substances contrary to s. 4(1) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, S.C. 1996, c. 19.
        
At the commencement of the trial, the accused pled guilty, and I entered guilty pleas to the three counts of possessing controlled substances. The trial proceeded on the first count of possessing a loaded prohibited firearm.
        
The Crown called two witnesses: the investigating officer, Cst. Bigcharles, and a firearms expert, Robert Caunt. The Evidence of Cst. Bigcharles
        
Cst. Bigcharles testified that at about 8 am on January 6, 2021, he responded to a report of a suspicious vehicle in a vacant lot on Tk’emups reserve land. The lot was in a residential area.
        
Cst. Bigcharles ran a computer check on the vehicle, and it was registered to a male person who was not the accused.
        
Cst. Bigcharles approached the truck on the driver’s side. The driver’s side window was fully open, and when he approached he was able to see in clearly.
        
He saw a female, passed out and apparently sleeping, in the driver’s seat with a half-eaten package of ice cream on her chest. There were no other occupants in the vehicle. He recognized the female as Ms. Morris, as he had previously interacted with her on several occasions. She was wearing a jacket, unzipped, with a hoodie underneath.
        
He woke her up, by shouting at her. At about that time, another officer named Buchanan arrived on scene. As Cst. Bigcharles was waking up the accused, Officer Buchanan advised that there was a can of bear spray on the passenger seat.
      Cst. Bigcharles asked the accused to step out of vehicle. She did so, and as she exited, Cst. Bigcharles observed a baggie of what appeared to be heroin on the floor of the vehicle on the driver’s side.
      At that time, he verbally arrested her for possession of a weapon, and for possession of controlled substances. 
      After handcuffing her, Cst. Bigcharles searched the accused. He found a modified flare gun, black in colour with a white zip tie on the barrel, in the accused’s right-hand jacket pocket. Cst. Bigcharles testified that he had to reach into her pocket to pull it out, and that it was approximately five inches deep in the pocket.
      He found a sum of cash in the hoodie, and he searched the car and found a purse containing pills, a scale, drugs, a pipe and empty baggies.
      Defence counsel cross-examined Cst. Bigcharles but his evidence was not shaken. Defence counsel suggested that the vehicle was found in an area which was known for nuisance wildlife, and suggested that there may have been flares or bear bangers or other such items in the vehicle, but Cst. Bigcharles did not agree with either of these propositions. He did concede that there were residences in the area around the vehicle which were known for drug activity.
      Cst. Bigcharles testified that after seizing the flare gun from the accused, he examined it. He observed one shotgun round in the chamber of the flare gun. There was a white zip tie to hold the barrel down. He cut the tie to open up the barrel, and observed that there was a screw which appeared to act as a firing pin.
      Cst. Bigcharles testified as to various photographs he had taken of the flare gun, its components and the other contents of the vehicle found at the time. He did not take any photos of either the interior or exterior of the vehicle. The Evidence of Robert Caunt
      The Crown called Robert Caunt to testify about the modified flare gun. Mr. Caunt has been a firearm and tool mark specialist for more than 22 years with the Vancouver Police Department. His qualifications to provide evidence about the flare gun and its characteristics were not disputed. A report and certificate authored by him was entered into evidence.
      He testified that he has seen flare guns of many varieties, and that he has seen the particular type of flare gun in this case, modified to discharge ammunition, on other occasions.
      He examined the flare gun in this case on May 3, 2021. He testified that it was a flare launcher modified with a new barrel made from steel and other material, and that the device was capable of chambering a .410 shotgun shell. He observed that the firing pin had been replaced with a screw which had been sharpened.
      The device was not originally designed to fire shells. The original barrel was entirely plastic, and was only intended to contain a flare. The original barrel was replaced by a steel replacement with a liner. The replacement barrel had a sufficient diameter to allow the device to accept a .410 shotgun shell.
      Black tape was wrapped around the grip area and the chamber end of the barrel. Mr. Caunt opined that the reason for that tape was to assist in the alignment of the firing pin when the barrel was closed. The zip tie would assist in holding the barrel closed.
      In order to test the device, Mr. Caunt inserted a primed shotgun shell and fired it. The device discharged the primer of the primed shotgun shell, and from that Mr. Caunt concluded that if one inserted a live cartridge into the device it would discharge the live cartridge. 
      He was asked why he did not test the device with live ammunition, and he said that in his opinion it was too dangerous to do so, and because to do so might result in the destruction of the exhibit.
      He testified that in another case, he did discharge a modified device, remotely for safety reasons. The result was that the device was destroyed but the shell exited the device. He said that he did not feel the need in this case to destroy the exhibit.
      As the result of his assessment, Mr. Caunt determined that the device was a functioning weapon that could cause serious bodily injury or death to a person.
      Mr. Caunt determined that the device’s barrel was 83 mm in length.
      He also discharged the shotgun shell and determined it to be ammunition. He put the shotgun shell into a lab-standard .410 shotgun and it discharged normally. I note that in any event, it was agreed in the agreed statement of facts that the ammunition found in the device meets the definition of ammunition in s. 84(1) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46.
      In cross-examination, defence counsel suggested that the flare gun would not have been capable of withstanding the pressure of a live shotgun shell. Mr. Caunt conceded that he did not directly test the device with a live shotgun shell for the reasons discussed above, but he observed that the barrel’s thickness was similar to that of a commercial firearm.
      Defence counsel suggested that it was possible that the shell would have detonated, rather than being shot down the barrel. Mr. Caunt’s answer was that the projectile would go down the muzzle although the breach face and frame would probably be destroyed.
      When asked whether he could say with certainty that the device would have fired, he said that he was quite certain that it would fire and meet the criteria of a firearm, in that it could cause serious bodily harm or death.
 
The Definition of Prohibited Firearm 
      “Firearm” is defined in s. 2 of the Criminal Code as “a barrelled weapon from which any shot, bullet or other projectile can be discharged and that is capable of causing serious bodily injury or death to a person, …”
      Section 84(1) defines a prohibited firearm as including “a handgun that has a barrel equal to or less than 105 mm in length, …”; and a handgun as meaning “a firearm that is designed, altered or intended to be aimed and fired by the action of one hand ...”
      Under s. 95(1), “every person commits an offence who, … possesses a loaded prohibited firearm … without being the holder of an authorization or a license ...” Issues
      The essential elements of the offence alleged in Count 1, which the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt, are that: a)    The accused was the offender; b)    The offence was committed on or about January 6, 2021, at or near Kamloops, British Columbia; c)    The accused possessed a firearm; d)    The firearm was loaded; e)    The firearm was a prohibited firearm; and f)     The accused did not hold an authorization or a licence under which she could possess the firearm in that place or a registration certificate for the firearm.
     
Regarding these elements, see R. v Montgomery, 2009 BCCA 41 at para. 61 in the context of a charge of possession of a loaded restricted firearm. 
      Further, the offence requires proof that the accused person had knowledge or was reckless or willfully blind with respect to the characteristics of the device which made it prohibited: see R. v. A.K., 1991 CanLII 416 (BC CA), B.C.J. No. 2953 (C.A.); and R. v. Aschert, 2017 BCSC 447.
      By way of an agreed statement of facts, it was admitted, among other things, that the accused was the offender, and that the accused did not hold an authorization, license or registration certificate for firearms.
      It is not disputed that the offence was committed on or about January 6, 2021, at or near Kamloops. There is no suggestion that the firearm was not loaded.
      The issues raised by the defence are whether the device was a prohibited firearm, whether it was in the accused’s possession, and whether the accused had knowledge or was reckless or willfully blind as to the characteristics of the device which made it prohibited. Whether the Device was a Prohibited Firearm
      The Crown submits that Mr. Caunt’s evidence establishes beyond a reasonable doubt that the device met the definition of a prohibited firearm. As stated above, a primed shotgun shell of similar length was successfully discharged from the device, and from this Mr. Caunt determined that the device could cause serious bodily injury or death.
      It is uncontested that the device’s barrel was less than 105 mm in length, and that it could be aimed or fired by the action of one hand.
      Defence counsel suggested that since Mr. Caunt did not test the device with live ammunition, it cannot be determined that it would have discharged an actual shell. However, as stated above, Mr. Caunt opined that although the frame probably would have been destroyed, he was quite certain that the weapon would have fired and met the criteria of a firearm. In this regard, I accept the evidence of Mr. Caunt.
      The fact that firing the device could have destroyed it is not legally relevant to the offence. There is no requirement in the Criminal Code that a firearm be capable of being fired repeatedly or multiple times. The Accused’s Knowledge
     
Defence counsel suggested that an ordinary person without Mr. Caunt’s knowledge would not have known the difference between a flare gun and the modified flare gun. She suggested, but without any evidentiary foundation, that the accused could have been carrying the device either because she had been camping or because the area in which she was arrested was known for nuisance wildlife.
      The law is clear that the trial judge is entitled to apply ordinary human experience and common sense in his or her assessment of the evidence. He or she should not apply speculative reasoning: R. v. Bi, 2011 BCCA 10, at paras. 15–16. As far as competing inferences from circumstantial evidence that might be open to a trial judge are concerned, he or she is “… not expected to treat real life cases as a completely intellectual exercise where no conclusion can be reached if there is the slightest competing possibility. The criminal law requires a very high degree of proof, especially for inferences consistent with guilt, but it does not demand certainty. …”: R. v. Ngo, 2009 BCCA 301 at para. 55. 
      In R. v. Villaroman, 2016 SCC 33, the Supreme Court of Canada held at para. 37:
     When assessing circumstantial evidence, the trier of fact should consider "other plausible [page1020] theor[ies]" and "other reasonable possibilities" which are inconsistent with guilt: R. v. Comba, 1938 CanLII 14 (ON CA), O.R. 200 (C.A.), at pp. 205 and 211, per Middleton J.A., aff'd 1938 CanLII 7 (SCC), S.C.R. 396; R. v. Baigent, 2013 BCCA 28, 335 B.C.A.C. 11, at para. 20; R. v. Mitchell, QCA 394 (AustLII), at para. 35. I agree with the appellant that the Crown thus may need to negative these reasonable possibilities, but certainly does not need to "negative every possible conjecture, no matter how irrational or fanciful, which might be consistent with the innocence of the accused": R. v. Bagshaw, 1971 CanLII 13 (SCC), S.C.R. 2, at p. 8. "Other plausible theories" or "other reasonable possibilities" must be based on logic and experience applied to the evidence or the absence of evidence, not on speculation.
 
      The suggestion that the accused may have thought the device was an actual flare gun which could be used to deal with wildlife is speculative.
      The device contained a shotgun shell and was significantly modified by a metal barrel and black tape. It was found in the accused’s jacket pocket. The modifications to the flare gun can be clearly seen. In my view, the only reasonable inference is that the accused either knew that it was a firearm or was reckless or willfully blind to that fact. 
Possession
      Regarding the issue of possession, as stated above, the device was found in the right pocket of the accused’s jacket. Defence counsel suggested that someone could have accessed her pocket while she was sleeping but Cst. Bigcharles testified that the device was approximately five inches deep in her pocket and that he had to reach inside to retrieve it.
     
The only reasonable inference, in my view, is that the accused put the device into her own pocket. I reiterate the law from Villaroman cited above. Further, in a case particularly dealing with the issue of possession (of cocaine for the purpose of trafficking), the Court of Appeal held as follows in R. v. Guray, 2015 BCCA 183 at para. 30:
     I do not think there is any possible conclusion other than that Mr. Guray knew he had the drugs in his pocket alongside other personal effects. To suggest that the drugs somehow found their way into his pockets without his knowledge calls for impermissible speculation in the absence of any evidentiary basis capable of supporting such an inference.
      In my view, this passage from Guray is applicable to the facts of this case. Conclusion
      I find, based on the totality of the evidence, that the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt the essential elements of Count 1. For the reasons stated above, I find Ms. Morris guilty of Count 1, the offence of possession of a prohibited firearm. 
