./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/sc/2023bcsc92.html
        
The appellant, Varinder Singh, appeals his conviction for criminal harassment, contrary to s. 264(b) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46. The offence is alleged to have occurred from November 3–December 17, 2019. Following a trial which lasted two days, Judge Senniw convicted Mr. Singh on October 30, 2020. On March 19, 2021, Judge Senniw suspended the passing of sentence, and placed Mr. Singh on probation for two years. Mr. Singh filed a notice of appeal from conviction on April 13, 2021. In that notice of appeal, he seeks to have the conviction set aside, and an acquittal entered.
        
Mr. Singh was self-represented throughout most of these proceedings. It became apparent that his primary ground of appeal was ineffective assistance of counsel, and that Mr. Singh sought to tender fresh evidence in support of that claim. Ms. de Jong was then appointed pursuant to s. 684 of the Criminal Code in a limited capacity, to assist Mr. Singh in advancing that application. I was subsequently appointed as case management judge, pursuant to the practice that has developed in this Court when an issue is raised concerning ineffective assistance of counsel in a summary conviction appeal.
        
Both Ms. de Jong and Ms. Bains, Crown counsel, attended multiple case management conferences and marshalled for the benefit of the court all the required affidavit and other material. The parties then filed written submissions, which each relied on at the time of hearing, without seeking to make any further oral submissions. Mr. Singh appeared at the hearing as well, and advised that he sought to rely on a written submission, previously filed, in addition to that filed on his behalf by Ms. de Jong. Mr. Singh declined the invitation to make any further oral submissions.
        
Consequently, I reserved judgment and stated that I would provide written reasons at a later date. These are those reasons. The Trial Proceedings
        
The Crown called two witnesses at trial, the complainant, Margarita Chapman and Cst. Guo, an RCMP officer who responded to a call made by Ms. Chapman on December 17, 2019, the final time Mr. Singh attended Ms. Chapman’s home uninvited. The defence called no evidence.
        
Ms. Chapman described a brief, somewhat tumultuous relationship between her and Mr. Singh, commencing with some casual meetings in summer 2019, and culminating with a steady dating relationship in September and October 2019. Ms. Chapman said it was an “on and off type of relationship”, which came to an end after an incident on October 28, 2019, in which Mr. Singh took Ms. Chapman’s phone and demanded that she tell him the password. After that date, Ms. Chapman considered the relationship over, and she ceased communicating with Mr. Singh.
        
Mr. Singh thereafter continued to communicate with Ms. Chapman, persistently, via various methods. He called her several times daily, on both cellular and land lines. He sent Ms. Chapman numerous emails, many of which became trial exhibits. Mr. Singh also attended at Ms. Chapman’s home uninvited on several occasions. Ms. Chapman testified that she told Mr. Singh more than once that she did not wish to communicate with him. She took steps to block his telephone calls on one of her telephones. Ms. Chapman did not respond to any of Mr. Singh’s emails.
        
In general, the emails were abusive and highly critical of Ms. Chapman. In some of them, Mr. Singh accused Ms. Chapman of abusing him sexually and emotionally, and stated that she had a narcissistic personality disorder. Mr. Singh also complained about his own mental health challenges in some of the messages, and on at least one occasion said that he was suicidal.
        
Not all of the emails were abusive toward Ms. Chapman. On November 14, 2019, under the subject line “Help my OCD”, Mr. Singh wrote: Let me know simply that you got my messages or emails, else it will trigger my anxiety, my OCD attacks and I will start calling you in a crazy way, which I do not want to do intentionally. Thanks for helping me to get away from you in a peaceful way.
      Ms. Chapman did not respond to that email, and Mr. Singh then sent a series of emails on November 15 and 16, 2019, in which he threatened suicide and court action because of what he said was his mistreatment by Ms. Chapman. 
      In cross-examination, Ms. Chapman agreed that she became aware toward the end of the relationship of some of Mr. Singh’s mental health issues, that he suffered from depression, obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), and that a nurse visited him daily to give him medication.
     
Ms. Chapman also agreed that she received both an email and text message from Mr. Singh on October 31, 2019, in which he asked her to block his communications. The text message was this: So humbly request with my hands folded to you. I cannot control my anxiety, depression and OCD symptoms just by taking medications regularly. Do it as early as possible so we both can live a peaceful life.
      The thrust of the defence submissions at trial was that Mr. Singh’s mental health issues were relevant to the mens rea of the offence, specifically that his mental illness should lead to a reasonable doubt that he knew or was wilfully blind or reckless as to whether Ms. Chapman was harassed by his conduct. 
     
The trial judge addressed that issue at paras. 21–28 of her Reasons. Specifically, the trial judge found as follows:
     Mr. Singh submits that he has some mental health issues that she was aware of and so he would not have known that his behaviour was harassing to her. He says that she knew he was on medications. Ms. Chapman had delivered it to him when their relationship terminated. He had told her that he had OCD, and she testified to that, and that he was depressed. In some of his emails he claimed that he was suicidal. She arranged to have a safety check done at one point.
     However, he was still tutoring students, so he certainly had enough mental capacity to tutor students and there is no evidence that he was out of touch with reality or in any way psychotic. …
     I find that Mr. Singh was at least reckless or willfully blind to the impact that his behaviour was having on her, and that any mental health issues he might have had did not impact his ability to recognize this. And further, that while their relationship had been off and on previously, Ms. Chapman was clear with him that it was over. The Fresh Evidence
      The proposed fresh evidence in this case consists of the following: a)           
A comprehensive psychological assessment report, jointly prepared by Dr. Karen Whittemore, a psychologist, and Erin Fuller, a practicum student; b)           
Two affidavits of Mr. Singh; and c)           
Two affidavits of Talia Magder, trial counsel for Mr. Singh.
      The psychological report was prepared at the direction of the court, prior to sentencing, and considered by the trial judge at those proceedings. By that time, Mr. Singh had discharged Ms. Magder and was represented by Ms. de Jong.
      The report was based on multiple sources of information, including clinical interview, psychological testing, and review of past medical records of Mr. Singh. Those records showed prior diagnoses of depression and anxiety disorder, possibly OCD, and bouts of suicidal ideation. Mr. Singh had been admitted to hospital in both India and Canada, as recently as October 2018, related to concerns of anxiety, panic, stress, depression and suicidal ideation. 
      The affidavits of both Mr. Singh and Ms. Magder detail discussions between them, including via email, as part of the trial preparation. Mr. Singh clearly wished to place evidence of his ongoing mental health problems before the trial judge. He raised the issue of being found not criminally responsible on account of mental disorder (NCRMD) with Ms. Magder, by reference to an article he found online related to s. 16 of the Criminal Code. There is a conflict in the affidavit evidence on the narrow question of whether Mr. Singh explicitly instructed Ms. Magder to pursue a finding of not criminally responsible by reason of mental disorder at trial. Mr. Singh says he gave Ms. Magder such instructions. Ms. Magder deposes that during discussions shortly before trial, she advised Mr. Singh that NCRMD did not apply to his situation, and he did not expressly instruct her to pursue that verdict. Issues on Appeal
      The sole issue for determination is this, as set out in Ms. de Jong’s statement of argument: Did the appellant suffer a miscarriage of justice as a result of the ineffective assistance of trial counsel? Discussion and Analysis
      The ineffective assistance of counsel is said by the appellant to be the failure of trial counsel to advance evidence and submissions in support of a verdict of NCRMD, pursuant to s. 16 of the Criminal Code. The miscarriage of justice is said to be the finding of guilt and registering of a conviction, as opposed to the special verdict of NCRMD. It is against that backdrop that the matter must be considered.
      There is no doubt that the conviction of a morally innocent individual would be a miscarriage of justice. The policy reason for the existence of the special verdict of NCRMD is rooted in the principle that it is anathema to our criminal justice system that those who are incapable, by reason of mental disorder present at the time of the unlawful conduct, of knowing either the nature and quality of their actions or that such actions are objectively morally blameworthy, should be found guilty: R. v. Oomen, 1994 CanLII 101 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 507, at paras. 29–30; R. v. Swain, 1991 CanLII 104 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 933, at para. 45.
      It is those considerations that led to the result in the Court of Appeal’s decision of R. v. Warsing, 1997 CanLII 12527 (BC CA), B.C.J. No. 2239 followed by the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Warsing, 1998 CanLII 775 (SCC), 3 S.C.R. 579. At trial, Mr. Warsing made a tactical decision not to raise NCRMD, but rather relied on an alternate perpetrator defence. Post-conviction, a psychiatric report opined that Mr. Warsing suffered from a major mental illness at the time of the offences, and should have been found not criminally responsible.
      In the Court of Appeal, McEachern C.J.B.C. for the majority, decided that in the unusual circumstances of that case, the psychiatric evidence should be admitted on appeal as fresh evidence, despite the complete lack of due diligence on the part of the appellant. At para. 31, McEachern C.J.B.C. noted that the Palmer test for admission of fresh evidence should not apply “because a risk of injustice can overcome the requirement of due diligence.”
      The Court of Appeal therefore admitted the fresh evidence, and directed a new trial, confined to the issue of NCRMD.
      On further appeal, a majority of the Supreme Court of Canada dismissed the Crown appeal, but directed that there be a new trial on all issues. The appeal court lacked jurisdiction to limit the new trial to a single issue.
     
On the broader question of appellate jurisdiction when NCRMD is raised for the first time on appeal, Justice Major, for the majority, said this:
     Mailloux dealt with the reasonableness of the jury's finding on a defence of NCRMD, not with the defence of NCRMD being raised for the first time at the appeal. To that extent and in the context of this appeal the observations of Lamer J. are not determinative of the question raised here. McEachern C.J.B.C. distinguished Buxbaum on its facts, noting that it did not involve the unusual history and conduct of an accused like the respondent. It is my opinion that it is in the interests of justice that Mailloux be read to recognize that where the defence of NCRMD is not raised at the trial and if the court of appeal concludes that it cannot make a determination with respect to NCRMD it is within the jurisdiction of the court of appeal in avoiding a miscarriage of justice, to order a new trial. In most cases it is likely that the court of appeal would have sufficient evidence to determine the NCRMD question. It is only in cases where the facts are complex and the court concludes that further evidence is required that a new trial would be ordered. [Emphasis added.]
      In this case, unlike Warsing, the appellant says he did wish to pursue a finding of NCRMD at trial, but was precluded from so doing by the conduct of his counsel. Mr. Singh stops short of saying that he expressly instructed Ms. Magder to seek a verdict of NCRMD, but does depose that he consistently instructed her that his mental illness should be put forward at trial, as part of his defence. Mr. Singh says that when he expressly raised the issue of mental illness impacting his criminal responsibility, Ms. Magder advised him not to pursue a “NCRMD defence”.
      Mr. Singh also complains of Ms. Magder’s refusal to obtain a psychiatric or psychological report in advance of trial, which would have provided valuable evidence of his mental illness.
      In cases where ineffective assistance of counsel is alleged on appeal, the court must consider whether a miscarriage of justice has occurred as a result of the acts or omissions of trial counsel. There is thus both a performance and a prejudice component to the analysis: R. v. G.D.B., 2000 SCC 22 at para. 26.
     
However, as noted in G.D.B., not every case will require the court to scrutinize the performance of trial counsel:
     Miscarriages of justice may take many forms in this context. In some instances, counsel's performance may have resulted in procedural unfairness. In others, the reliability of the trial's result may have been compromised.
     In those cases where it is apparent that no prejudice has occurred, it will usually be undesirable for appellate courts to consider the performance component of the analysis. The object of an ineffectiveness claim is not to grade counsel's performance or professional conduct. The latter is left to the profession's self-governing body. If it is appropriate to dispose of an ineffectiveness claim on the ground of no prejudice having occurred, that is the course to follow (Strickland, supra, at p. 697).
     
G.D.B. was considered and applied by the Court of Appeal in R. v. Aulakh, 2012 BCCA 340. At para. 68, Justice Smith set out the approach the court would there take to the matter:
     In summary, I would propose to consider the appellant's application to adduce fresh evidence in the following manner: 1.         Determine if the fresh evidence is admissible under the rules of evidence (e.g., no hearsay, speculation, opinion or mere argument). 2.         If the fresh evidence complies with the rules of evidence and if it is apparent from the trial record that the fresh evidence could not reasonably have affected the result (assuming the allegations of ineffective representation could be established) there is no miscarriage of justice and the application to adduce fresh evidence and the appeal should be dismissed. 3.         If that determination is not apparent and the fresh evidence in support of the allegation of ineffective representation is relevant to that issue and credible, admit the fresh evidence for the limited purpose of determining the allegation of ineffective representation, an issue that was not adjudicated at trial. At this stage the fresh evidence will not be admissible to determine the substantive issue of whether a miscarriage of justice has occurred. 4.         In considering whether the performance component of the test for ineffective representation has been established, apply the standard of "reasonable professional judgment", remembering that the appellant must establish the facts underlying the claim of ineffective assistance on a balance of probabilities. 5.         If the performance component of the ineffective assistance of counsel claim is established, consider whether the appellant has established the prejudice component of the test, namely a "reasonable probability" that the outcome of the trial would have been different if the appellant had received the effective assistance of counsel (i.e., if there has there been a miscarriage of justice). If the answer is yes, the fresh evidence application should be granted, the appeal allowed, and a new trial ordered. If the answer is no, the fresh evidence and the appeal should both be dismissed.
      That is the manner in which I intend to analyze the present application to adduce fresh evidence, and ultimately, merits of the appeal.
      The fresh evidence here falls into two categories. The affidavit evidence is primarily aimed at the performance component. The psychological report goes directly to the prejudice component. I therefore intend to analyze it first, to determine if the appellant has suffered any prejudice.
      Clearly the report complies with the basic rules of evidence. It is an expert report, prepared by a qualified expert. Thus, it is prima facie admissible.
      However, in my view, the content of the report amply demonstrates that Mr. Singh has suffered no prejudice from its absence at trial, in that its reception could not have affected the result. This is not a case like Warsing, where the expert opined that the mental illness from which the accused suffered at the time of the offence should lead to a finding of not criminally responsible. The report in this case does not support such a finding.
     
Under the heading “Current Offence”, the report describes in some detail Mr. Singh’s perspective about his actions. In part, the report notes the following: When asked about the offence, Mr. Singh explained that he and [Ms. Chapman] had previously broken up approximately three times over “passive aggressive behaviour” and that he assumed they would get back together like they usually did. He said that despite the “red flags” in their relationship, he continued to pursue it because of his loneliness. He also explained that due to his mental health, he became dependent on her (e.g., “she was my family;” “she was my everything”). … When asked about the purpose of the repeated contact, Mr. Singh explained that he was trying to tell her about his difficulties and fears to his mental health and criminal matters and said he was “venting out”. … Mr. Singh explained that the more he saw her lack of concern and empathy as she ignored him, the more he wanted to contact her. He described [Ms. Chapman] as “narcissistic” and said that he was a victim to her behaviour (i.e., that she used him financially, sexually, and physically). Indeed, he explained that this was why he contacted her friends and workplace; because he wanted to inform them that she was narcissistic and needed to see a psychiatrist. … When asked who or what was to blame for the offence, he identified his mental health, his lack of knowledge of the dating norms in Canada, and [Ms. Chapman]. Specifically, he acknowledged that his mental health played a significant role (i.e., he said his abandonment feelings were triggered, he was emotionally distressed, and he had difficulty coping with intrusive thoughts) and said that his actions were not intentional due to this. However, he emphasized that if [Ms. Chapman] was a “good woman” she would have dealt with things differently. Further, he said he did not feel bad for the offence because [Ms. Chapman] was the guilty one and that she should be getting help for her own mental health rather than placing the blame on him. When asked if he wished he had done anything differently, he said he wished he had not shared so much with her (i.e., in terms of his family history, mental health, and loneliness).
      There is nothing in that account which supports a finding that Mr. Singh did not know that his actions were wrong from the perspective of societal norms. For the most part, Mr. Singh appears to be pointing to his mental health issues as an excuse for his behaviour and also blaming Ms. Chapman.
      Of even greater significance, under the heading “Diagnostic Impressions and Clinical Opinion”, the report notes the following: a)           
Mr. Singh meets the diagnostic criteria for OCD, with fair insight, and appears to recognize that his intrusive thoughts may not be true; b)           
In the past he met the diagnostic criteria for major depressive disorder, generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder, but they all appeared to be in at least partial remission; c)           
Mr. Singh did not meet the diagnostic criteria for a personality disorder; d)           
Mr. Singh did not appear to have a primary psychotic disorder; and e)           
His difficulty coping with distressing events appeared to have exacerbated his mental health symptoms.
      In short, nothing in the medical opinion supports a conclusion that, at the time of the offence, Mr. Singh was suffering from a mental disorder that rendered him incapable of appreciating the nature and quality of his actions, or appreciating that those actions were wrong.
      The medical opinion could not have impacted the finding at trial that “there is no evidence that [Mr. Singh] was out of touch with reality or in any way psychotic.” The proposed fresh evidence could not have affected the result.
      The only impact the report could have had on the trial process was at sentencing, and the trial judge considered it in that context, in holding that Mr. Singh’s moral culpability was reduced because of his mental health issues.
      It is thus abundantly clear that there has been no miscarriage of justice. Conclusion
      The application to adduce fresh evidence is therefore dismissed. I need not consider the performance of counsel, and indeed it would be undesirable that I do so: G.D.B. at para. 29.
      For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is dismissed.
