./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/sc/2023bcsc134.html
        
THE COURT:  I wish to advise those present that there is an order in place banning the publication of information that may tend to identify the complainant, now victim, in this case.  For this reason and for convenience, I will refer to the victim as O.H.  Also, in the interests of time I do not intend to read out citations or all of the quotations that these reasons contain.  Should a transcript be ordered I will add the headings, citations and quotations. Introduction
        
On December 18, 2021, a jury convicted Mr. Brozer of all counts of the Indictment which included Counts 1 and 2, the offences of sexual interference and invitation to sexual touching of O.H. on or about June 8, 2019, contrary to ss. 151 and 152 of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 [Code] respectively.  Mr. Brozer was also convicted by a jury on Count 3, the offence of sexual assault of O.H. on June 8, 2019, contrary to s. 271 of the Code.  
        
The Crown and counsel for Mr. Brozer agree that due to overlap, Counts 2 and 3 should be conditionally stayed in accordance with the principle against multiple convictions articulated in R. v. Kienapple, 1974 CanLII 14 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 729.  I am satisfied the offences of sexual assault and invitation to sexual touching under Counts 2 and 3 of the Indictment share the same factual and legal nexus and as such it is appropriate to direct a conditional stay of proceedings in relation to those Counts.
        
The court's current task is to determine a just and appropriate sentence in light of the circumstances of the offence, Mr. Brozer's circumstances, the impact of the offence on O.H., and also in accordance with the relevant law and sentencing principles including importantly the framework for sentencing in cases involving sexual offences against children established in R. v. Friesen, 2020 SCC 9 [Friesen]. 
Circumstances of the Offence
        
Mr. Brozer and O.H. became acquainted while working together at a restaurant.  On June 8, 2019, they arranged to go to the beach together.  At the time O.H. was 15 years old and in grade 10, and Mr. Brozer was 23 years old.  
        
Mr. Brozer came to O.H.'s house and picked her up in his car.  Mr. Brozer told O.H. that he needed to stop by his house to pick something up.  Mr. Brozer and O.H. drove to Mr. Brozer's house and they entered his house and ultimately his bedroom.  O.H. sat on Mr. Brozer's bed. 
Mr. Brozer began kissing and cuddling O.H., which O.H. testified she was initially okay with.  O.H. testified that she told Mr. Brozer she was 15 years old and they could not do anything sexual.  
        
Mr. Brozer escalated the sexual activity by removing O.H.'s pants and underwear and digitally penetrating her vagina, performing oral sex on her, and engaging in unprotected vaginal intercourse. 
O.H. testified that she did not consent to this activity.  Mr. Brozer testified that O.H. was a willing participant in the sexual activity.  As O.H. was 15 years old, she was incapable of consenting to the sexual activity.  Following the sexual intercourse, Mr. Brozer drove O.H. back to her home.  
        
Mr. Brozer was charged with the offences in the Indictment and as I mentioned he was convicted by the jury on all Counts.  
        
On March 10, 2022, I rendered reasons for judgment regarding the factual findings for sentencing following the jury trial.  In summary, as explained in those reasons, I accepted as expressed or implied facts essential to the jury's verdict of guilty on all counts on the Indictment that on June 8, 2019, Mr. Brozer committed all of the acts at issue against O.H. in Surrey, British Columbia, including that on that date O.H. was 15 years old and hence incapable of consenting and that the sexual intercourse occurred during which Mr. Brozer inserted his penis into O.H.'s vagina.
      I also reached an independent determination and was satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that at the time of the offences Mr. Brozer knew that O.H. was 15 years old and he did not wear a condom during the offences.  I was not satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Brozer choked O.H. or forcibly held her down during the offences. Victim Impact
      During the sentencing hearing, O.H. read her victim impact statement into the record.  O.H. described that when the offence took place it altered her perspective of the world and impacted every aspect of her life.  She could no longer go to her workplace because she felt Mr. Brozer was present there. 
She described having trouble focussing at school.  
      O.H. said that many aspects of her day-to-day life have suffered as a result of what happened to her during the sexual assault.  Her mental and physical health deteriorated and she has had trouble sleeping.  
      O.H. also describes feeling constantly worried about her personal safety since being victimized.  All of these impacts have caused O.H. to avoid leaving her home and to suffer detrimental effects in all aspects of her personal life.  O.H. indicates that she now has difficulty trusting others, especially males, since the offence.  
      O.H. explains that as a result of the offence she feels that she lost a part of herself she has been trying to get back ever since.  
      It is clear from O.H.'s statement that she is working hard to recover, despite the trauma that she experienced during and after the offence. 
Overall, O.H. struck me as a determined young person who is refusing, as she put it, to continue living in fear because of what Mr. Brozer did to her.  The sexual violence that she endured has regrettably and undoubtedly left O.H. to deal with painful memories and emotions. Circumstances of the Offender
      Mr. Brozer is currently 27 years old.  He was born in Alberta, although he moved with his sibling and parents to British Columbia when he was very young.  Mr. Brozer was approximately five years old when his parents separated and he and his sibling lived with his mother.  
      Mr. Brozer has lived for many years in and around the same community in the Lower Mainland.  He has a good and close relationship with his father, as well as extended family, such as his grandparents.  His father re-partnered and Mr. Brozer has a good relationship with his stepmother and step-siblings.  
      Mr. Brozer graduated from high school and began living at his father's home.  Mr. Brozer was diagnosed with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) in school and he required additional support for that condition during his school years.  
      Mr. Brozer has had steady employment, namely as a server in the food service industry for a number of years, including at the time of the offence. 
Mr. Brozer has also lived independently, with friends, and a girlfriend.  
      Mr. Brozer states that his career goal prior to his conviction was to work in law enforcement.  He gained some experience volunteering and participating in “ride-along” opportunities with police officers.  He completed the first level of requirements towards becoming a plumber.  
      Mr. Brozer denies having any history of mental health problems.  He may have attended counselling around the time of his parents' separation but overall he reports having good mental health.  
      Mr. Brozer reports having long-term romantic relationships in the past.  He has not had a long-term romantic relationship since the offence, and he adamantly denies being sexually attracted to underage females.  Mr. Brozer is currently single and he has no children.  
      Mr. Brozer has no criminal record.  He does not report having any issues with respect to alcohol or drug abuse.  He first tried alcohol while in high school.  In the past he also tried marijuana and other illicit drugs but he denies ever having a problem with excessive use of intoxicating substances. 
      Overall, Mr. Brozer's background appears to be relatively happy and stable.  He enjoys a loving relationship with his family, and he reports having close friendships.  Mr. Brozer appears to have good mental health, and he adjusted well to a childhood diagnoses of ADHD.  
Attitude to the Offences/Efforts Toward Rehabilitation
      Since being charged, Mr. Brozer has continued working in the food service industry, including most recently as a bouncer and bartender.  Mr. Brozer currently lives in rented accommodation with a roommate.  Mr. Brozer has had some short-term romantic relationships since the offence, and he reports no adverse issues in that area.  
      Mr. Brozer continues to report that the sexual activities he engaged in with O.H. were consensual.  He also continues to deny knowing that O.H. was 15 years old at the time of the offence.  He reports that he did not wear a condom because he never wears one and O.H. did not ask him to wear one.  Mr. Brozer reports realizing that he "messed up" by failing to ascertain O.H.'s age at the time of the offence and he denies coercing or forcing O.H. to have sex with him.
      Mr. Brozer addressed the court at the conclusion of the sentencing submissions.  He apologized for his actions and stated that if he could he would take back what he did.  Mr. Brozer acknowledges the trauma he caused O.H. and he describes feeling remorse and regret for his actions.  
      Mr. Brozer describes the offence as out of character.  He further describes experiencing the consequences of the conviction; for example, when he was let go from employment and by realizing that he was unlikely to qualify for a career in law enforcement.  Since the offence, Mr. Brozer has attended some counselling sessions but he is not under the care of a psychologist or psychiatrist.  
Letters of Support
      Exhibit 2 in these proceedings are five letters of support written by Mr. Brozer's family and friends.  These letters are all supportive of Mr. Brozer and they report that Mr. Brozer is deeply remorseful.  Some of the letter writers acknowledge that Mr. Brozer can be impulsive, but all of them regard Mr. Brozer in a positive light and identify him as a person with a strong capacity to change and contribute meaningfully.  
      Mr. Brozer is described in these letters as polite, caring, helpful, trustworthy and honest.  Many of the letter writers express a willingness to assist and support Mr. Brozer in the future and they set out numerous reasons for believing that Mr. Brozer has learned from the experience and that he will do whatever is necessary to avoid reoffending.  
      Again, Mr. Brozer has no criminal record, and he is a first-time offender.  
Presentence Report and Psychological Assessment
      Pursuant to s. 721 of the Code, presentence reports, including a presentence report by a probation officer and a registered psychologist report, were prepared setting out Mr. Brozer's personal history and his attitude towards the offence and the range of services that may be available to him.  These reports were marked as Exhibits 3 and 4.  I have reviewed these reports in the preparation of these reasons.  
      In a psychological report dated September 16, 2022, the assessing psychologist discusses the testing and personal interview results from Mr. Brozer and various collateral sources such as Mr. Brozer's father, a friend and his probation officer.  Mr. Brozer denies having a sexual interest in underage females or in violent sexual activity, although he does report some involvement in consensual “rough” sexual activity with partners.  Mr. Brozer views pornography regularly but denies having an interest in pornography that depicts violent sexual activity or underage females.  
      Mr. Brozer's psychological testing results do not suggest the presence of indicators of clinical psychopathology.  He did not endorse any symptoms consistent with a mood disorder, nor interest in or arousal by pre-pubescent females.  
      In the risk assessment portion of the report, the assessor notes the presence of several risk factors, including Mr. Brozer's history of engaging in violent sexual activity with partners.  Counsel for Mr. Brozer points out that according to Mr. Brozer this type of sexual activity was consensual activity with adult partners and he objects to any suggestion that Mr. Brozer engaged in past violent sexual activity on a non-consensual basis.  The assessor also notes that O.H. alleges that Mr. Brozer choked and restrained her wrists during the sexual assault.  The assessor acknowledges that the court concluded that such aggravating factors had not been proven beyond a reasonable doubt.  
      The assessor concludes that Mr. Brozer has some psychological adjustment issues related to self-awareness due to a disparity between his clear understanding of the inability of underage persons to engage in sexual activity and his ability to navigate and problem solve social situations with females of unknown ages.  While the assessor regards some of Mr. Brozer's strategies for navigating the risks of encountering underage females as simplistic, it is noted that he did not have serious problems with, for example, extreme minimization or denial of sexual violence.  No serious problems related to mental health or sexual deviance were identified.  
      The assessor found some problems related to Mr. Brozer's social adjustment; for example, surrounding, establishing and maintaining long-term intimate relationships due to issues of infidelity and lack of trust.  On issues of manageability, the assessor noted some deficits regarding planning; for example, around career and employment in light of the conviction for the offences.  It was noted that while he continued to work in the hospitality industry, this line of work may increase the chances of encountering high risk situations with underage females.  
      However, I note that Mr. Brozer has exercised caution in selecting his place and hours of work since the offence to reduce chances of encountering underage females at work.  
      The assessor concludes that if Mr. Brozer were to commit future acts of sexual violence, the most plausible scenario is likely to be a repeat of his past behaviour; namely, sexual activity with someone who is underage and more broadly involving a failure to obtain a consent.  The assessor regards the imminence of this scenario as “chronic” (i.e., it could occur in coming months or years) but also acknowledges the likelihood is low due to Mr. Brozer's lack of interest in underage females, his awareness of the wrongfulness of his conduct and his willingness to participate in programs or interventions aimed at mitigating the risk of reoffending.
      Mr. Brozer's counsel disagrees with this aspect of the risk assessment and points out that Mr. Brozer is a first-time offender who suffered a one-time lapse in judgment in circumstances where Mr. Brozer has had no further issues since the charges were laid.  
      To reduce future risk, the assessor recommends additional treatment and psychoeducation regarding the nuances of consent, working with mental health professionals to help him understand how his prior sexual offending arose, and the development of safety plans to prevent similar situations in the future.  
      Overall I find the presentence reports support a conclusion that Mr. Brozer has not indicated a specific sexual interest in underage females, he has good awareness of the wrongful nature of sexual activity with underage persons, and his likelihood to commit future acts of sexual violence is generally assessed as low. Crown and Defence Position The Crown’s Position on Sentence
      The position of the Crown on sentence is that Mr. Brozer should be sentenced to three or four years in custody for the offence of sexual interference contrary to s. 151 of the Code.  
      The ancillary orders that Crown counsel says are required in this case include a mandatory DNA sample pursuant to s. 487.04(a) and 487.051(1) of the Code, a mandatory weapons prohibition pursuant to s. 109(1) and (2) of the Code for a period of not shorter than 10 years from the end of any imprisonment, and a mandatory order for compliance with the Sexual Offender Information Registration Act, S.C. 2004, c. 10 [SOIRA] 20years pursuant to s. 490.011(1), 490.012(1) and 490.013(2)(b) of the Code. 
      The Crown counsel also submits that it would be appropriate to make the following ancillary orders: a)    Pursuant to s. 743.21 of the Code that Mr. Brozer have no contact or communications, directly or indirectly, with O.H. for the duration of his custodial sentence; and 
b)    Pursuant to s. 161 of the Code for a period of 10 years Mr. Brozer be prohibited from: 
             
i.       
attending a public park or public swimming area where persons under the age of 16 years are present or can reasonably be expected to be present, or a daycare centre, a schoolground, playground, or community centre; 
           
ii.       
seeking, obtaining or continuing any employment whether or not the employment is renumerated, or becoming a volunteer in a capacity that involves being in a position of trust or authority towards persons under the age of 16 years; and 
          
iii.       
having contact including communicating by any means with a person who is under the age of 16 years except for immediate family members or in accordance with a further order of this court.
      Crown counsel acknowledges that a conditional sentence order is an available sentence.  However, Crown counsel takes the position that given the nature of the offence against an under-aged person, and especially in light of the principles set out in Friesen, a conditional sentence order would not be a fit and proper sentence in all of the circumstances.  
      Crown counsel submits that the following are aggravating factors for the court to consider:  
a)    Mr. Brozer subjected O.H. to the most invasive form of sexual violence, namely, penile/vaginal penetration, in addition to other sexual activity.  
b)    Mr. Brozer did not wear a condom during the offence.  
c)    Mr. Brozer knew that O.H. was 15 years old at the time of the offence.  
d)    Mr. Brozer planned the sexual activity and he diverted O.H. to his home instead of the beach as part of his plan.  
e)    Mr. Brozer was O.H.'s means of transportation on the day in question, which increased her vulnerability.
      Crown counsel submits that the following are mitigating factors to consider:  
a)    Mr. Brozer has no criminal record; 
b)    Mr. Brozer is employed; and 
c)    Mr. Brozer has supports in the community.
      Crown counsel provided the court with case authorities discussing sentencing, including in relation to the sentences for sexual interference or sexual assault of a child.  I have reviewed and considered all of those authorities. Defence Position on Sentence
      Defence counsel opposes the Crown's position of a three to four year sentence of incarceration.  Defence counsel submits that a conditional sentence order (CSO) for two years less a day with a three-year probationary order is the appropriate sentence, especially given that Mr. Brozer is a youthful first-time offender.  
      Defence counsel emphasizes that the circumstances at bar involve a one-time lapse of judgment by Mr. Brozer at a time when O.H. was not quite 16 years old.  Defence counsel submits that the circumstances satisfy the requirements described in s. 742.1 of the Code for imposing a CSO. 
In short, defence counsel submits that imposing a CSO with a three-year probationary order aligns with the principle of constraint and it would have the necessary deterrent effect.  
      Defence counsel submits that there was no evidence that Mr. Brozer planned the sexual activity that is the subject of the charges.  I agree that there was no evidence from any witness to the effect that Mr. Brozer planned the offence on the day in question.  
      I reviewed and considered the submissions made by defence counsel. 
Defence counsel referred me to a number of cases, including R. v. Scofield, 2019 BCCA 3 [Scofield], R. v. Vaux, 2021 BCSC 1773 [Vaux],
 R. v. P.R.J., 2021 BCSC 2537 [P.R.J.] and R. v. Chen, 2021 BCSC 697 [Chen] all of which I have read and considered.  
The Law
      There is no disagreement as to the applicable law.  
Principles of Sentencing
      The fundamental principles and purposes to be considered by courts in sentencing are set out in ss. 718 and 718.2 of the Code.  
      Section 718 of the Code provides that the fundamental purpose of sentencing is “to protect society and to contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions" with reference to six objectives.  These objectives are: denunciation of unlawful conduct; deterring the offender and other persons from committing offences; separating offenders from society where necessary; assisting in rehabilitating offenders; providing reparations for harm done to victims and the community; and promoting a sense of responsibility in offenders, acknowledging the harm done to victims or to the community.  
      Sentencing is an exercise of balancing.  No single objective trumps the others.  A sentencing judge's role is to determine which objectives merit the greatest weight, given the circumstances of the offence and the offender: R. v. Nasogaluak, 2010 SCC 6 at para. 43.
      As the offence at issue in this case involves an underage person, s. 718.01 of the Code provides that a sentencing judge must given primary consideration to the objectives of denunciation and deterrence in sentencing Mr. Brozer.  The sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender: s. 718.1.  
      Section 718.2 of the Code describes a number of specific principles to be considered in sentencing, including that the sentence should account for any relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances: s. 718.2(a). 
As I mentioned, it is not disputed that because O.H. was a 15-year-old at the time of the offence, this constitutes an aggravating factor: s. 718.2(a)(ii.1). 
     
The Supreme Court of Canada in Friesen, at para. 5 provides clear instructions for sentencing in cases involving sexual offences against children: 
       … we send a strong message that sexual offences against children are violent crimes that wrongfully exploit children’s vulnerability and cause profound harm to children, families, and communities. Sentences for these crimes must increase. Courts must impose sentences that are proportional to the gravity of sexual offences against children and the degree of responsibility of the offender, as informed by Parliament’s sentencing initiatives and by society’s deepened understanding of the wrongfulness and harmfulness of sexual violence against children. Sentences must accurately reflect the wrongfulness of sexual violence against children and the far-reaching and ongoing harm that it causes to children, families, and society at large.
      The court in Friesen makes clear that established sentencing ranges for sexual violence against children must increase relative to the ranges established for sexual violence against adults: Friesen, paras. 114-118.  
      The court states that “mid‑single digit penitentiary terms for sexual offences against children are normal and upper‑single digit and double digit penitentiary terms should be neither unusual nor reserved for rare or exceptional circumstances”: Friesen, para. 114.
      In R. v. Williams, 2020 BCCA 286 at paras. 11-21 [Williams] our Court of Appeal describes the principles set out in Friesen and their impact on, for example, sentencing ranges previously established in British Columbia.  However, the court declines to set the “appropriate range” for British Columbia and instead emphasizes that a new analytical framework is to be applied to the sentencing of sexual offences against children: Williams, at paras. 50-51.  
Analysis
      Keeping in mind the principles and guidance provided by the Code, Friesen and Williams, I turn now to the particular circumstances of this case starting with the mitigating and aggravating factors.  
Mitigating Factors
      Mr. Brozer has no criminal record.  Additionally, as a 23-year-old at the time of the offence, he is a youthful offender with a history of steady employment before and after the offence.  The many letters of support, as well as the information contained in the presentence reports, indicate that Mr. Brozer has a supportive social network to assist him during and after his sentence.  In my view, these are all mitigating factors.  
      Mr. Brozer had a stable upbringing and a relatively happy childhood.  There is no suggestion that anything in Mr. Brozer's background, such as mental health issues, is a mitigating factor.  
Aggravating Factors
      As I mentioned, s. 718.2 of the Code provides a deemed aggravating factor in the circumstances of this case, namely, that the offence was committed on O.H. at a time when she was 15 years old.  
      There is also the aggravating factor of the major impact of the offence on O.H. which she described to me through her victim impact statement. 
I also note that Mr. Brozer did not wear a condom during sexual intercourse with O.H.  Mr. Brozer told the presentence report writer he never wears a condom and he did not wear one during the offence because O.H. did not ask him to.  Given that Mr. Brozer exposed O.H. not only to a highly invasive form of sexual violence, but also to the obvious health risks associated with having unprotected sexual intercourse, I find this to be an aggravating factor.  It is no answer for Mr. Brozer to point out that the victim did not ask him to wear a condom.  
      My finding that Mr. Brozer knew O.H. was 15 years old when the offence occurred is also a factor that I must take into account in sentencing since it tends to increase his moral culpability as compared to an offender who failed to take all reasonable steps to determine a complainant's age: R v. Angel, 2018 BCSC 1751, para. 70.  
      Defence counsel submits that in order to carry out the objectives of s. 718 of the Code, I ought to, in addition to taking into account the few aggravating factors and the important mitigating circumstances, also take guidance from the reasoning for imposing conditional sentences on offenders in P.R.J. and Vaux, so as to not deprive Mr. Brozer of his liberty because a less restrictive sanction would be appropriate in all of the circumstances.  
      Defence counsel urges me to consider a number of circumstances related to O.H. such as the fact that she was not “really” a vulnerable child because, for example, she worked and paid taxes, she initiated the outing with Mr. Brozer on the day in question, and there was evidence that she was initially okay with Mr. Brozer kissing her.  By raising these points, defence counsel was clear to say that he was not suggesting that O.H. had somehow asked to be the victim of sexual violence.
      In my view, these submissions potentially invite me to diminish O.H.'s entitlement to protection as an underage person.  I remind myself not to rely on stereotypes that minimize the harm and wrongful nature of sexual violence against children, including teenage children.  Mr. Brozer, as a 23-year-old adult, had the onus to avoid sexual violence directed towards a child and, as noted in Williams, the victim's degree of participation in the offence is not a legally relevant consideration at sentencing: Williams, at para. 21, citing Friesen, at para. 154.  
      As required by the authorities, deterrence and denunciation are paramount considerations in sentencing Mr. Brozer for this offence.  I have considered the other sentencing principles, including rehabilitation and all of the sentencing options.  As I already mentioned, I have also reviewed both counsel's oral and written submissions and considered the case authorities that I was referred to.  
      In support of the submissions that a CSO is a fit and appropriate sentence, defence counsel referred me to Scofield, which predates Friesen, where our Court of Appeal considered, among other things, the constitutionality of the mandatory minimum sentence for sexual interference and whether a CSO was a fit and proper sentence.  Mr. Scofield was 22 at the time of the offences and there were two complainants and numerous instances of sexual violence including sexual intercourse.  Mr. Scofield had significant cognitive impairments and he pled guilty to some of the counts.  
      Although the Court of Appeal agrees that a CSO is an appropriate sentence in the rare circumstances at issue in Scofield, the court emphasizes, at para. 70, that conditional sentences will rarely satisfy the primary sentencing objectives of deterrence and denunciation in cases involving sexual touching of vulnerable children, especially where there is abuse of trust or authority.  I realize that in the case before me there is no suggestion that Mr. Brozer's conduct involved abuse of trust or authority.  
      In Vaux, the court concluded that a CSO was a fit and proper sentence for Mr. Vaux, who pled guilty to two counts of sexual interference, which included vaginal intercourse with two underaged female victims.  In light of Mr. Vaux's unique and exceptional personal circumstances, including that he was a first-time Indigenous offender who was diagnosed in childhood with specific disorders that caused him significant social and developmental challenges, a CSO was made.  
      In P.R.J., the court concluded that a CSO was a fit and proper sentence for an offender who was convicted of one count of sexual interference and one count of invitation to sexual touching involving her seven or eight-year-old daughter.  The offences consisted of the offender digitally penetrating and kissing the victim's vagina and causing the victim to touch her own vagina.  
      As a result of the offences, the victim was removed from the care of the offender.  The court concluded a CSO was an appropriate sentence because, among other things, the offender had no criminal record, the child had been removed from the offender's care, and the offences were an aberration in the mother/daughter relationship that did not reoccur in the period afterwards and were driven by the offender's alcohol and substance abuse issues.  
      I have also considered R. v. Proulx, 2000 SCC 5, and the factors outlined in R. v. Bremner, 2000 BCCA 345 for the consideration as to whether a CSO would accord with the principles of denunciation and general deterrence.  
      I recognize that there are a number of factors present before me that potentially weigh in favour of a CSO.  For example, Mr. Brozer has no criminal record, he was only 23 at the time of the offences, there is no evidence of subsequent offending, there is evidence of a good work history, and a psychological assessment indicating that Mr. Brozer's risk of recidivism is generally low.  
      However, upon considering all of the relevant factors, I have decided that a CSO is not a fit and proper sentence in all of the circumstances because it does not meet the requirements of deterrence, both general and specific, and denunciation in relation to sexual interference contrary to s. 151 of the Code.  
      I reach this conclusion, including because I find that the circumstances before me do not involve the kind of rare or exceptional circumstances that the courts have identified in cases such as Vaux and P.R.J.  Further, in the circumstances I conclude a CSO would also fail to adequately address the profound harm to O.H. resulting from the offence.
      When I consider all of the circumstances discussed in the context of the highly individualized sentencing exercise before me, I conclude that a term of imprisonment is called for by the principles of sentencing and by the application of the Friesen factors: Friesen, para. 121.  In my view, given all of the circumstances, the other form of sentence suggested, mainly a CSO and probation order, is not a fit and proper sentence.  
      I found R. v. G.T.A., 2021 BCCA 425 [G.T.A.] to be a helpful reference because it shares some factual similarity with the present case, including because the offender met the underaged victim as a result of working with her.  In G.T.A., the offender was 23 and the victim was 15 years old.  The offender knew the victim's age and he began a relationship with her that spanned a period of ten months, involved numerous instances of sexual activity, including sexual intercourse, over the course of the relationship. 
Again, I recognize that in the case at bar, the offence happened on one occasion and not over the course of many months.  
      In G.T.A., there were some mitigating circumstances that are absent in the case at bar, including a guilty plea and the offender's history of significant mental health issues.  The sentencing judge arrived at a sentence of three years for the sexual interference count.  
      On appeal, the court dismissed the appeal from that sentence disagreeing with the appellant that it was demonstrably unfit.  The Court of Appeal further found nothing exceptional about the case to take it outside of the usual sentencing range: GTA at paras. 87-88.  I read G.T.A. as supportive of my conclusion that in the case at bar there are no exceptional or rare circumstances that would support a CSO or take this matter out of the usual sentencing range.  
Imposition of Sentence
      Mr. Brozer, please stand as I am now going to impose a sentence.
      On the charge of sexual interference of O.H. contrary to s. 151 of the Code, which is Count 1 of the Indictment, I impose a custodial sentence of three years.  
      Pursuant to s. 743.21 of the Code, I order Mr. Brozer to have no contact or communication, directly or indirectly, with O.H. for the duration of this custodial sentence.
      In addition, there will be the following ancillary orders:  
1.    Pursuant to s. 487.051(1) of the Code, there will be a DNA order.  Pursuant to s. 487.05(1), I authorize the taking of samples of bodily substances from Mr. Brozer reasonably required for the purposes of forensic DNA analysis. 2.    Pursuant to  s. 109(1) and (2) of the Code, Mr. Brozer, you are prohibited from possessing any firearm, other than a prohibited firearm or restricted firearm, and any crossbow, restricted weapon, ammunition and explosive substance during the period that begins on the day on which this order is made and ending not earlier than ten years after your release from imprisonment after conviction for this offence.  Mr. Brozer, you are prohibited from possessing any prohibited firearm, restricted firearm, prohibited weapon, prohibited device and prohibited ammunition for life; and 3.    Pursuant to s. 491.011(a), and 490.012(1), and 490.013(2)(b) of the Code, there will be an order requiring Mr. Brozer to comply with the provisions of the SOIRA for 20 years.
      Regarding the Crown counsel's request for orders pursuant to s. 161 of the Code, I am not satisfied in light of all of the circumstances, including because Mr. Brozer will be required to comply with SOIRA for a lengthy period, that it is necessary to make the order sought.  I therefore, decline to do so.  
      That concludes my oral reasons for sentence. Counsel, we may now adjourn.  Thank you.
