./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/nl/pc/2023canlii605.html
           
Mr. Dyer is charged with 11 offences on a single information. All of the offences except one relate to a single complainant NM. Mr. Dyer has asked to sever count 4 from the information. Count 4 is a single count of sexual assault. The balance of the charges are, assault, uttering threats, harassment and breaking into a dwelling.
 
           
Counsel for the accused is applying pursuant to section 591(3) for the severance order. She has argued that the basis for the severance is:
 
1)   
The charge of sexual assault should be severed as it is discrete in time from the other charges 2)   
The accused wishes to explore the possibility of family violence intervention court with respect to the other charges  
3)   
The inclusion of the sexual assault charge will complicate a proposed section 278 application 4)   
The accused wishes to testify on the sexual assault charge and not on the other offences
           
On the issue of a proposed application to family violence intervention court. She has submitted that she has had discussions with counsel for the crown regarding the accused’s eligibility for that Court. She has stated that she has been told that but for the sexual assault charge, he would be eligible and accepted to that court.
 
           
She has also submitted that she has received “a massive package of electronic, social media and text messages between the applicant and the complainant (estimate is well over 1000 items) spanning over a lengthy period (in excess of a year)”. She has submitted that if the sexual assault charge remains on the information the accused will need to make a 278 application with respect to all the charges. This would result in a lengthy more complex process whereas if the sexual assault charge were severed any section 278 application with respect to it would be much shorter and simpler. 
 
           
She submits that the sexual assault charge is alleged to have occurred on a single date on September 7, 2020. A date separate from the other allegations of physical assault, harassment, break and entry and uttering threats. She has said it is the intention of the accused to testify in relation to the sexual assault count but not on the other charges. 
 
           
Counsel for the crown opposes the application for severance and takes the position that the allegation of sexual assault is not an isolated incident but “part of an ongoing tirade of abuse.” She has submitted the fact that the accused wishes to testify with respect to one allegation and not the others is not in and of itself sufficient to warrant severance. She notes that the accused has not yet made an application pursuant to section 278 and does not believe any such application would be necessarily lengthy. Finally, she has submitted that the accused is not a suitable candidate for Family Violence Intervention Court and she would not support an application for him to engage in that process.
 
            
Severance of a count or counts may be ordered when the accused establishes that the interests of justice require it. The accused must establish this on a balance of probabilities (R v B (M.O.) 123 CCC 3(d) BCCA paragraph 270.  Both counsel have relied on R V Last 2009 SCC 45 (CanLII), S.C.J. No. 45. 
Courts have given shape to the broad criteria established in s. 591(3) and have identified factors that can be weighed when deciding whether to sever or not. The weighing exercise ensures that a reasonable balance is struck between the risk of prejudice to the accused and the public interest in a single trial. It is important to recall that the interests of justice often call for a joint trial. Litchfield, where the Crown was prevented from arguing the case properly because of an unjudicial severance order, is but one such example. Severance can impair not only efficiency but the truth-seeking function of the trial. 18 The factors identified by the courts are not exhaustive. They simply help capture how the interests of justice may be served in a particular case, avoiding an injustice. Factors courts rightly use include: the general prejudice to the accused; the legal and factual nexus between the counts; the complexity of the evidence; whether the accused intends to testify on one count but not another; the possibility of inconsistent verdicts; the desire to avoid a multiplicity of proceedings; the use of similar fact evidence at trial; the length of the trial having regard to the evidence to be called; the potential prejudice to the accused with respect to the right to be tried within a reasonable time; and the existence of antagonistic defences as between co-accused persons: R. v. E. (L.) (1994), 1994 CanLII 1785 (ON CA), 94 C.C.C. (3d) 228 (Ont. C.A.), at p. 238; R. v. Cross (1996), 1996 CanLII 5992 (QC CA), 112 C.C.C. (3d) 410 (Que. C.A.), at p. 419; R. v. Cuthbert (1996), 1996 CanLII 8341 (BC CA), 106 C.C.C. (3d) 28 (B.C.C.A.), at para. 9, aff'd 1997 CanLII 397 (SCC), [1997] 1 S.C.R. 8 (sub nom. R. v. C. (D.A.)).
            
In dealing with the application, the first issue addressed by counsel for the accused is the issue of his participation in Family Violence Intervention Court. That court is a specialized therapeutic court. It is described on the provincial court website as:
 
FVIC is a specialized criminal court, which in law operates in the same manner as traditional criminal justice courts, but is administered in a manner that attempts to better serve victims and hold offenders more accountable. This specialized court requires the offender to participate in intervention or The Judge considers participation in FVIC, intervention, and bail supervision in determining programming regarding family violence. The goal of the Court is to prevent and reduce incidents of family violence by addressing the root causes of violence through teamwork with key community partners. Working together allows faster access to services for the victim and offender. The Court focuses on improving victim safety and offender responsibility. FVIC sits in St. John's 2 Wednesday afternoons per month (alternating with the Mental Health Court) and in Stephenville on alternate Wednesday afternoons of the same month.
 
To be eligible to participate in the court: 
 
Males or females 18 years or older charged with: Criminal Code offenses, eligible for community disposition, involving current or past intimate partner relationships including: Breaches of or failure to comply with court orders,  Mischief, destruction of property, Uttering threats, criminal harassment,  Assault, assault with a weapon or causing bodily harm.
 
 
 
           
 Participation in that process requires that the crown attorney make an initial assessment that the offences themselves are eligible. If the crown attorney determines that the charges are eligible, the accused may start the process by undergoing a psychological assessment to see if he/she would be suitable to participate. If the accused is deemed acceptable, he/she may go on with the process by entering guilty pleas to the offences. There is no provision for judicial review of the decision to accept the accused into the program at the initial stage. It is initially solely a decision by the crown attorney followed by a psychological assessment.
 
       
In Krieger v Law Society of Alberta, S...J. No. 45 the court took the positon that in criminal proceedings the exercise of prosecutorial discretion in core areas of the Attorney General’s office was not subject to review except in exceptional circumstances holding: 
    
We agree with these comments. The quasi-judicial function of the Attorney General cannot be subjected to interference from parties who are not as competent to consider the various factors involved in making a decision to prosecute. To subject such decisions to political interference, or to judicial supervision, could erode the integrity of our system [page390] of prosecution. Clearly drawn constitutional lines are necessary in areas subject to such grave potential conflict.”
 
       
There are limited instances in which courts have subjected prosecutorial discretion to review. These are instances where there has been flagrant impropriety (Campbell v. Ontario 1987 CanLII 4333 (ON CA), O.J. No.338) or where the prosecutor acted in bad faith or for an improper purpose (Krieger law Society of Alberta supra) or with a lack of objectivity (R v Nixon S.C.J. No.4.).
 
       
  In this case there is no evidence that the crown attorney has acted inappropriately in assessing Mr. Dyer’s suitability for inclusion in the Family Violence Intervention Court Counsel for the accused has not suggested that there is any abuse of process rather she has expressed her view that the accused would benefit from inclusion in that court and that the process itself is beneficial to the administration of Justice. I agree that Family Violence Intervention Court is an effective and beneficial addition to the response to intimate partner violence. However, I find that I cannot look behind the decision of the crown attorney to not accept the accused into that process. 
 
       
The process currently in place for admission to the court does not provide for judicial review in the selection process The process itself is multifaceted, there are eligibility criteria for which offences the Court may consider and then two distinct stages, the initial prosecutorial charge screening followed by a psychological risk assessment. This is not a process that lends itself readily to review and falls squarely into the area of core prosecutorial discretion. Consequently, I cannot find that the accused’s potential admission to Family Violence Intervention Court to resolve some of the offences provides a basis for severance of the count.
 
       
 Counsel for the accused has indicated that the accused intends to testify with respect to count 4 but not with respect to the other counts. This is a factor that can be considered by the trial judge to justify severance of a count from the Information. The accused’s desire to testify must be objectively justifiable. (Last supra, paragraph 146). The justification would consist of the type of potential defences open to the accused or the nature of his testimony. (Last paragraph 26). Counsel for the accused has not provided detail about the nature of the proposed evidence. However, it is clear that a sexual assault allegation may well involve issues that are unique to that offence and different form the balance of the allegations on the Information. There is a basis to conclude that his desire to testify on that count and not the others is objectively justifiable. 
 
       
In addition, counsel for the accused has indicated that there may be an application pursuant to section 278:  “if he wishes to reference the electronic messages in the disclosure package”. On this last point, counsel has suggested that this would have the effect of lengthening the trial and adding days of court time. That seems possible depending on the amount of electronic disclosure the accused intends to refer to in his defence. I cannot make a determination on that issue without more evidence on the point. Counsel has not filed a section 278 application and is not in a positon at this stage to properly set out the scope of the application.
 
       
On balance, I note that the charges date from 28th October 2019 to the 11th of April 2021. The single count sought to be severed falls within this date range and counts 5, 6 and 7 are alleged to have occurred on the same date as count 4. All four of these allegations are alleged to have occurred on the 7th of September, 2020. The two main witnesses are the same in relation to all of the counts. Count 4 is not therefore isolated in time from the other offences and does not have a separate group of witnesses distinguishing it from the other counts. Similarly, the nature of the allegation bears similarity to the other offences and arises from the relationship of the accused with the complainant.
 
       
I find as a result that on considering the factors for the purpose of ensuring a reasonable balance "between the risk of prejudice to the accused and the public interest in a single trial". I can find no general prejudice to the accused in proceeding with a single trial. The evidence is not complex, and the desire to avoid multiplicity of proceedings favours a single trial. Further, while there is an objectively justifiable rationale for the accused to testify on count 4, but not on the other counts; that in itself is not a significant factor favoring severance. The length of the trial, or trials, and the right of the accused to be tried within a reasonable time, are neutral factors in this case. Finally, with respect to the possibility of a section 278 application complicating the proceeding, that is an issue that may be addressed if the application is filed and it appears that severing of the count becomes necessary at that time.
 
       
 Application dismissed.
