./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/nl/pc/2023canlii2060.html
           
These are the reasons for sentencing the accused to a term of imprisonment of 210 days, less credit for time spent on remand and making the sentence for one offence concurrent to the others, resulting in a net sentence of 102 days. LAW
           
The goals of sentencing, and sentencing procedure, are codified in part XXIII of the Criminal Code. The primary goal of sentencing is protection of the public: see R. v. Butler, 2019 NLCA 21. Rehabilitation, general and specific deterrence, and denunciation of crime are also goals of sentencing. We recognize the concept of parity of sentence: sentencing must be proportionate and generally in accord with similar sentences ordered for similar offences, committed by similar offenders. In R. v. Bissonnette, 2022 SCC 23, at para 51, the Court said that proportionality has a restraining function, and in this sense serves to guarantee that a sentence is individualized, just and appropriate.
           
Of particular importance in this case is Criminal Code s. 718.2 (a)(ii): a sentence should be increased or reduced to account for any relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or the offender, and, evidence that the offender, in committing the offence, abused the offender’s intimate partner or a member of the victim or the offender’s family, shall be deemed to be aggravating circumstances.
           
Of similar import is s. 718.201: A court that imposes a sentence in respect of an offence that involved the abuse of an intimate partner shall consider the increased vulnerability of female persons who are victims, giving particular attention to the circumstances of Aboriginal female victims.
           
These provisions are relevant here because the victim of one of the assault offences is the former common law spouse of the accused, and she is the mother of their three children.
           
Incarceration is the last option in sentencing. When the accused breaches court orders, a non-custodial, community-based sentence may not be appropriate, because a community-based sentence pivots on the willingness of the accused to comply with court-ordered conditions. THE CONCEPT OF A RANGE OF SENTENCE
           
In Canada (Attorney General) v. O'Flaherty (1997), 1997 CanLII 14649 (NL CA), 155 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 150 (Nfld. C.A.) at para 20, Steele J.A. said that "The phrase 'range of sentence' is susceptible to different meanings."
           
In R. v. Oake, 2010 NLCA 19, at para 69, Rowe J.A. (as he then was) said that judges must impose sentences in line with precedent, noting always that for each offence and each offender some elements are unique.
           
In R. v. Nasogaluak, 2010 SCC 6, 1 S.C.R. 206 (S.C.C.) at para 44, Lebel J. said that: “... it must be remembered that, while courts should pay heed to these ranges, they are guidelines rather than hard and fast rules. A judge can order a sentence outside that range so long as it is in accordance with the principles and objectives of sentencing. Thus, a sentence falling outside the regular range of appropriate sentences is not necessarily unfit.”
       
In R. v. Lundrigan, 2012 NLCA 43, the Court of Appeal said that a "fit sentence" is one "that takes account of the circumstances of the offences and the offender".
       
In R. v. Cluney, 2013 NLCA 46, at para 22, Barry J.A. cited Nasogaluak and said that “While sentencing ranges are merely guidelines rather than hard and fast rules, a judge ordering a sentence outside the regular range should explain how it is in accordance with the principles and objectives of sentencing”.
       
In R. v. Boudreault, 2018 SCC 58, at para 58, the Supreme Court of Canada said that “sentencing is first and foremost an individualized exercise, which balances the various goals of sentencing, while taking into account the particular circumstances of the offender as well as the nature and number of his or her crimes”.
       
One must conclude from a review of the jurisprudence that sentences should be comparable to the sentences which were imposed in other cases, but tailored to suit the particular circumstances of the accused. The key to sentencing is proportionality. Finding a proportionate sentence requires balancing the circumstances and attitude of the accused, the impact on the victims, and the public interest in denouncing and deterring others from committing these type offences.
       
It must be noted here that the victims of these crimes both filed victim impact statements, and both described the anxiety which continues to haunt them  as a result of the crimes committed against them by the accused.
       
We move now to consider the offences committed by the accused. The Offences Committed by the Accused
       
It is unnecessary to reproduce here the full reasons for convicting the accused, because the reasons for convicting him are reported, at R. v. Gover, N.J. No. 6 (QL).
       
 As a result, I will summarize his offences here. The offences, which were all committed in 2022, comprise three criminal adventures, as the term was coined by the late Goodridge C.J.N. in R. v. Crocker, 1991 CanLII 2737 (NL CA). There are the uttering threats in March, the two assaults in May, and the breach of the “no contact” bail condition in August.  Subject to a consideration of the global sentence for totality, sentences for offences committed on separate dates usually are made consecutive: see R. v. Hutchings, 2012 NLCA 2 (CanLII).
       
As indicated in the reasons for convicting the accused, he uttered a long list of chilling threats to kill his ex spouse’s then boyfriend. These were audio recorded and the recordings were played at trial. A summary of the threats is reproduced in the trial decision, and may be summarized as a long list describing how the accused planned to murder his ex spouse’s then boyfriend, hide his corpse in the woods, and kill his family.
       
At page 8 of the presentence report, the accused is described as accepting responsibility for his actions. However, he then goes on to minimize the offences. In relation to the threats uttered to his former spouse to kill her boyfriend, he said it had been “an empty threat”. As noted in the decision convicting the accused, there were some 19 threats, many of them graphic and chilling in nature. Range of sentence for threatening to kill a person
       
When prosecuted summarily, the offence of uttering a death threat has a maximum statutory sentence of a fine of not more than $5,000 or to a term of imprisonment of not more than two years less a day, or to both. See Criminal Code ss. 264.1 and 787. The usual range of sentence for the offence found in the jurisprudence is more modest.
       
In Crocker, Goodridge C.J.N., said that “Sentences for threats to cause bodily harm range up to one year; although frequently it has been ordered that the sentence be served concurrently with sentences imposed for other crimes committed in conjunction with the threat.” The cases do not draw any appreciable difference between death threats or threats to cause bodily harm, and the sentences are usually significantly less than the one year sentences mentioned in Crocker.
       
In R. v. Lyver, 2010 CanLII 11910 (NL PC), at para 41, Judge Gorman reviewed sentences for uttering threats, as follows:
 For the offence of uttering threats, not involving an intimate relationship, the range of sentence extends from a conditional discharge (see R. v. L.H.B. (2006), 2006 NLTD 87 (CanLII), 257 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 307 (N.L.S.C.)) to three years imprisonment (see R. v. Janes (1999), 1999 CanLII 18925 (NL CA), 170 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 269 (N.L.C.A.)). Periods of imprisonment of fourteen days (see R. v. Lewis (2002), 2002 CanLII 54024 (NL SC), 212 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 145 (N.L.S.C.)); one month (see R. v. H.P. (1995), 1995 CanLII 9875 (NL CA), 133 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 20 (N.L.C.A.) and R. v. Ryan (2006), 2006 NLTD 167 (CanLII), 261 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 326 (N.L.S.C.)); two months (see R. v. Sheppard (2003), 2003 NLCA 2 (CanLII), 220 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 299 (N.L.C.A.); R. v. Savchenko (2000), 2000 CanLII 28797 (NL SC), 191 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 225 (N.L.S.C.) and R. v. Stacey, [2010] N.J. No. 55 (P.C.)); three months (see R. v. Cormier (2005), 2005 NLTD 35 (CanLII), 245 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 271 (N.L.S.C.); R. v. Rowbottom, [2006] N.J. No. 31 (P.C.) and R. v. Eveleigh, [2007] N.J. No. 411 (P.C.)); four months (see R. v. Pumphrey (1995), 1995 CanLII 9834 (NL CA), 127 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 286 (N.L.C.A.)); and six months (see R. v. J.R.B., [2004] N.J. No. 101 (P.C.) and R. v. Hunt (2007), 2007 NLTD 204 (CanLII), 273 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 308 (N.L.S.C.)) have been imposed.
       
It must be noted that the foregoing range, from discharge to six months, refers to cases where a threat was made between parties who were not involved in an intimate relationship. Uttering a threat to an intimate partner is, as indicated earlier, a more serious matter. In R. v Young, 2020 CanLII 76213 (NL PC), the accused had threatened to burn down his former girlfriend’s home. He had committed other offences, and so totality operated to reduce the overall sentence imposed. For the threat offence, a sentence of 60 days was ordered. A similar sentence is appropriate for the offence here as well. Range of sentence for assault
       
The accused assaulted his former spouse and her boyfriend. At trial he denied having assaulted anyone, but admitted to taking his former spouse under the arms and lifting her off the ground in an effort to get her away from the car, where she was trying to collect her children.
       
In the presentence report, at page 8, the accused claimed that he had “attempted to defend himself”. This is different from his evidence at trial, where he described their ineffectual efforts to choke him. There was no air of reality to his claim, then or now, that he was defending himself. On the contrary, he was angry, and assaulted the mother of his children and her boyfriend.
       
In R. v Young, 2019 CanLII 5831 (NL PC), from paras 43 to 54, Judge Gorman did an extensive review of the sentencing jurisprudence for assault of an intimate partner, or former intimate partner. It appears from the review that the range of sentence is from a discharge to a term of imprisonment of six months.
       
For the assault of his former spouse, the accused should be sentenced to 60 days in custody. For the assault of her then boyfriend, which he committed after the man had refused to stop video recording him, he should be sentenced to 30 days in custody. Range of sentence for breach of non-contact bail order
       
Breach of bail conditions are a constant matter on the Provincial Court docket throughout the Province. The Court of Appeal has recognized that: see R. v O'Quinn, 2017 NLCA 10 (CanLII), at para 30, citing R. v. Murphy, 2011 NLCA 16, 304 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 266 at paras. 27-28. The Court of Appeal said in those decisions that sentences for breaches of court orders should ordinarily be consecutive to the sentences for the offences that gave rise to the breaches, and that the range of sentence is generally from one to three months imprisonment, or up to six months where the Crown proceeds by way of indictment. 
       
The accused had been placed on bail, with a non-contact provision. It restricted communication with his former common law spouse to third party arrangements. He breached that non-contact provision by contacting her. At page 8 of the presentence report, we read the following: In relation to the charge of failure to comply with a condition of a court order, Mr. Gover admitted that he had contacted  [name of complainant] directly after attempts to make contact through their agreed upon third party were unsuccessful.
       
It appears from this that the accused is attempting to minimize, or even justify, his breach of the bail condition. When men breach non-contact conditions, they are communicating to their former spouses that the victims are powerless, and that the Court order is meaningless. This is why breach of a non-contact bail condition is so much more serious than a breach for being out after curfew.
       
Given the seriousness of the non-contact breach, a sentence of 60 days is appropriate for the offence. Totality & Remand Credit
       
Before making any adjustment of the total sentence, the individual sentences are as follows:
          Offence                                                       Sentence
          Uttering threats                                           60 days
          Assault of former spouse                             60 days
          Assault of former spouse’s boyfriend           30 days
          Breach of noncontact bail condition             60 days
          Total sentence before adjustment                210 days
       
The accused committed three separate criminal adventures, in March, in May, and in August, 2022. Subject to totality, the sentences for the three separate dates should be made consecutive. It is arguable that the sentences for the two assaults committed on May 7, 2022, should receive consecutive sentences. This would avoid the appearance that the accused received no real penalty for knocking the phone out of the man’s hand and then putting him in a headlock. However, in the context of the totality principle, the sentence for that assault can be made concurrent. This reduces the total sentence to 180 days, less remand credit.
       
S. 719(3.1) of the Criminal Code sets a statutory maximum of credit one and one-half days for each day spent in custody. S. 719(3.2) requires that the court shall give reasons for any credit granted and shall cause those reasons to be stated in the record. The parties agree that the accused should receive remand credit at the rate of one and one-half days for each day spent in custody.
       
S. 719(3.3) of the Criminal Code provides as follows: The court shall cause to be stated in the record and on the warrant of committal the offence, the amount of time spent in custody, the term of imprisonment that would have been imposed before any credit was granted, the amount of time credited, if any, and the sentence imposed.
       
The accused was remanded into custody on November 29, 2022. He has now been in custody for 52 days. The parties agree that he is entitled to credit of 1.5 days for each day spent on remand awaiting sentencing. This results in a credit of 78 days. 
       
Pursuant to s. 719(3.3), this results in the following: Offence       time in custody               sentence                credit          net sentence Uttering threat      30 days                 60 days                 45 days       15 days       
Assault former spouse    20 days       60 days                  30 days      30 days       
Assault her boyfriend     n/a              30 days concurrent    zero         n/a Breach noncontact bail    2 days         60 days                 3 days         58 days Net sentence                   52 days       180 days               78 days       103 days               
       
I have reduced the 58 days for the breach of bail condition to 57 days to make the net result of 102 days left to serve: 180 -78 = 102. Where should the sentence be served?
       
Given the violent nature of the offences, and the breach of the bail condition, it would be inappropriate to sentence the accused to a community based sentence: s. 742.1(a) of the Criminal Code requires that the court be satisfied that the service of the sentence in the community would not endanger the safety of the community and would be consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing set out in sections 718 to 718.2. I am not satisfied as to either prerequisite has been met here. As a result, the sentence will be served in an institution. Ancillary orders
       
There are a number of ancillary orders, including probation, DNA, and a firearms prohibition. I will deal with the firearms prohibition order first, because s. 731.1(1) of the Criminal Code requires it: 
Before making a probation order, the court shall consider whether section 109 or 110 is applicable.
       
S. 110(1) of the Criminal Code provides that where a person is convicted of an offence in the commission of which violence against a person was used, threatened or attempted, the court that sentences the person or directs that the person be discharged, as the case may be, shall, in addition to any other punishment that may be imposed for that offence or any other condition prescribed in the order of discharge, consider whether it is desirable, in the interests of the safety of the person or of any other person, to make an order prohibiting the person from possessing any firearm, cross-bow, prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition or explosive substance, or all such things, and where the court decides that it is so desirable, the court shall so order.
       
The level of violence inherent in the offences of uttering threats and assaults committed here raise a very serious concern about access to firearms or ammunition. The actions of the accused have left the victims traumatised and suffering from anxiety, as the victim impact statements provide. The accused is prohibited from the possession of any firearm, cross-bow, prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition or explosive substance.
       
The usual firearms prohibition is no more than ten years, as set out in s. 110(2) of the Criminal Code. However, there is an exception in s. 110(2.1), as follows: Despite subsection (2), an order made under subsection (1) may be imposed for life or for any shorter duration if, in the commission of the offence, violence was used, threatened or attempted against (a) the person’s intimate partner; (b) a child or parent of the person or of anyone referred to in paragraph (a); or (c) any person who resides with the person or with anyone referred to in paragraph (a) or (b).
       
The prohibition order in this case will be for 16 years, by which time the youngest child will be of the age of majority.
       
A probation order will issue, for two years following the release of the accused from custody. The probation order conditions are as follows: 1)   
keep the peace and be of good behaviour[1]; 2)   
appear before the court when required to do so by the court; 3)   
notify the court or the probation officer in advance of any change of name or address, and promptly notify the court or the probation officer of any change of employment or occupation; 4)   
report to a probation officer within two working days of release from custody, and thereafter when required by the probation officer and in the manner directed by the probation officer; 5)   
attend counselling as directed by the probation officer, including, but not limited to, counselling for mental health issues, anger management, self control, and respectful relations; 6)   
abstain from communicating, directly or indirectly, with Shane Baker; 7)   
Have no contact with the victim except in compliance with a court order, through the offices of Family Justice Services, the department of Children, Seniors and Social Development or through a mutually acceptable third party; 8)   
Not to possess any knife with a blade longer than three inches, and then only for the purposes of preparing food or eating it; and 9)   
The accused is specifically prohibited from the possession of any axe, hatchet, machete, or other bladed tool or weapon with a cutting edge longer than two inches.
       
Uttering threats and assaults are secondary designated offences. DNA can identify an offender, and it can exonerate a person who is falsely accused of committing an offence. These offences, committed over the span of several months, were the first offences committed by the accused. Taking the DNA samples will be minimally invasive on the privacy and security of the accused.
       
Given the nature of these offences, including threats to leave the blood of one victim on the porch of the residence of the other victim, it is appropriate to order that the accused provide such samples of bodily substances as may be required to enter his DNA into the national databank.
       
Given his incarceration, the accused will not have to pay the victim surcharges which would otherwise apply. CONCLUSION
       
A sentence of 180 days, less credit for time on remand, is appropriate. The accused is sentenced to a net sentence of 102 days, followed by probation for two years, a firearms, ammunition, and explosives prohibition order for 16 years, and an order for the collection of DNA material.
