./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/nl/pc/2023canlii3051.html
    It is rare for young offenders to be sentenced to a custodial sentence.  The policy against the use of custody as a sentence, unless there are no reasonable alternatives, is enshrined in the Youth Criminal Justice Act, S.C. 2002 (see section 38(2)(d)).
    In this case, BM was involved in a relationship with another teenager (Ms. X).  After a trial, he was convicted of having assaulted her, contrary to section 266 of the Criminal Code of Canada, R.S.C. 1985 (see N.J. No. 264 (P.C.)).  In addition, he has pleaded guilty to having committed the offences of uttering a threat to kill Ms. X and breaching a release order that prohibited him from having contact with her, contrary to sections 145(4)(a) and 264.1(1) of the Criminal Code. 
The Issue:
    The sole issue I must determine is what constitutes an appropriate sentence for the offences committed by BM.  BM is sixteen years of age. He has no prior convictions. 
    In R. v. McClements, 2017 MBCA 104, the Manitoba Court of Appeal indicated that “fundamental” to the sentencing regime contained within the Youth Criminal Justice Act “is the presumption of diminished moral blameworthiness for young persons, which recognizes that ‘because of their age, young [persons] have heightened vulnerability, less maturity and a reduced capacity for moral judgment’” (at paragraph 34).  However, in R. v. Joseph, 2020 ONCA 73, the Ontario Court of Appeal noted that while “rehabilitation is an important factor for consideration when sentencing a youth, there are other ‘important factors that are integral to the accountability inquiry’” mandated by the Youth Criminal Justice Act (at paragraph 105). My Decision:
    The offences committed by BM are serious. Assaults that occur in relationships are not diminished by the ages of the offender or the victim.  However, in sentencing young offenders, the sentencing principle of general deterrence does not apply (see R. v. B.M.S., 2016 NSCA 35, at paragraph 31). As a result, the imposition of a custodial sentence is less likely, despite the seriousness of the offence.  
    I conclude that an appropriate sentence in this case is the placing of BM on probation for twelve months and ordering him to perform thirty hours of community service work.  I have concluded that this is an appropriate sentence because of BM’s lack of any prior convictions and to encourage his rehabilitation.
    Let me explain my reasons for this conclusion in greater detail by commencing with a review of the circumstances of the offences committed by BM. 
The Assault:
    In convicting BM of the offence of assault, I wrote as follows (at paragraphs 5 to 9, and 45): The evidence presented at the trial established that MB and Ms. X were “dating”. 
On April 10, 2021, they and two of their friends (AC and LD) went to the Greco Restaurant in Corner Brook. 
 
Ms. X testified that while sitting at the restaurant, she received a telephone call from the grandmother of one of her friends.  She stood up to answer it. This appeared to cause MB to become upset.
 
Ms. X testified that while she was talking on the phone, MB grabbed her head and banged it against the wall and then the table.  Ms. X testified that her forehead hit both objects, but that she did not suffer any visible injuries, though she did have a bad headache. 
 
LD testified that the incident occurred before Ms. X spoke with her friend’s grandmother.  She testified that Ms. X had asked BM to move so she could leave the table.  He refused and she tried to “squeeze” by him.  LD testified that MB grabbed Ms. X’s arm and pushed her against the wall. LD indicated that MB then twisted Ms. X’s arm behind her back and pushed her headfirst on to the table, saying: “Don’t talk to me like that”. 
 
Ms. X testified that she and LD left the restaurant and were subsequently picked up by her mother. 
 
There is significant if not overwhelming evidence that establishes that BM assaulted Ms. X by pushing her against a wall and banging her head against the table.  I recognize that Ms. X did not suffer any visible physical injuries.   However, I must be careful not to speculate as to what if any injuries would be expected to occur.  This is not one of those cases in which certain injuries would be expected if a description of an assault is accurate (such as a stabbing, for instance).  The lack of a visible injury to Ms. X’s head does not cause me to doubt her description of what occurred. The Threat:
    BM sent Ms. X a number of Snap Chat messages in which he threatened to kill and harm her. 
The Breach of the Release Order:
  BM had been released pursuant to on an order that prohibited him from contacting Ms. X.  Using another person’s phone, he sent Ms. X a message making rude comments about her. 
The Circumstances of the Young Offender:
  BM is sixteen years of age.  He has no prior convictions.  He resides with his mother and step-father.
 BM is not attending school.  He stopped attending in 2021.  He is employed part-time at a department store as a stock clerk.  However, his hours of work are presently limited to approximately four to ten hours per week. Community Service Work:
  The pre-sentence report indicates that BM “expressed that he is wanting to make amends for this crimes. He is hoping to get community service and is willing to do whatever he is tasked with doing. BM is physically able to participate in community service work. He does not drive but his mother, father, stepfather and grandmother have all been supportive in providing him with rides to work”. The report also indicates that  BM “has the time available to complete community service work. There are a number of non-profit community organizations that are willing to take youth offenders and have work that needs to be completed. The Humber Community YMCA and Community Youth Network are examples”.  At the sentence hearing, the youth court worker indicated that thirty hours of community service work could be obtained and completed in a reasonable period of time.    
The Youth Court Worker’s Recommendations:
  The youth court worker made the following recommendations as regards sentencing: Given B’s willingness to make amends, Child and Youth Services assesses that B would benefit from supervised probation, completing an apology letter to the victim, and engaging in services deemed necessary by CYS or other service providers, such as counseling. Counseling options within this province currently require the youth's consent for service. While B is not open to counseling at this time, I recommend that he attend Mental Health and Addictions counseling through Blomidon Place. I also recommend that B attend and engage in an education program to meet the requirements for graduation.  
From a Child and Youth Services perspective, B was cooperative during each of our meetings and it appears that there would be no concerns with supervising B in the community or finding a community service placement for him. B currently has stable housing, part-time employment, and the support from his family. B presents as committed to carrying out the conditions that will be set out for him upon sentencing.  
 
 
The Principles of Sentencing Applicable to Young Offenders:
  In R. v. D.W., 2011 NLCA 21, the Court of Appeal indicated that “sentencing under the [Youth Criminal Justice Act] focuses on the individual young person and how best to achieve the stated objectives of the [Youth Criminal Justice Act] in the particular circumstances” (at paragraph 16). In R. v. P.R., 2018 SKCA 27, the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal indicated that imposing sentence upon a young offender requires “a context specific approach; an approach that differs entirely from the sentencing regime for adult offenders” (at paragraph 61).  However, in R. v. JGHW, 2020 MBCA 86, the Manitoba Court of Appeal held that while a sentence must “promote the rehabilitation and reintegration into society of the young person”, it must also “hold the young person accountable through meaningful consequences” that “reflect the consequential harm of the young person’s actions or the normative character of his conduct” (at paragraph 41). 
The Sentencing Principles Set Out in the Youth Criminal Justice Act:
  Section 3(1) of the Youth Criminal Justice Act sets out a number of principles that are to be applied to the sentencing of young offenders. 
Section 3(1)(a): Section 3(1)(a) of the Youth Criminal Justice Act indicates that the youth criminal justice system “is intended to protect the public by holding young persons accountable through measures that are proportionate to the seriousness of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the young person” by “promoting the rehabilitation and reintegration of young persons who have committed offences.” Section 3(1)(b): Section 3(1)(b) states that the criminal justice system for young persons “must be based on the principle of diminished moral blameworthiness or culpability” and it must emphasize the following: (i) rehabilitation and reintegration, (ii) fair and proportionate accountability that is consistent with the greater dependency of young persons and their reduced level of maturity, (iii) enhanced procedural protection to ensure that young persons are treated fairly and that their rights, including their right to privacy, are protected, (iv) timely intervention that reinforces the link between the offending behaviour and its consequences, and (v) the promptness and speed with which persons responsible for enforcing this Act must act, given young persons’ perception of time. In R. v. JMO, 2017 MBCA 59, the Manitoba Court of Appeal considered these provisions and suggested that “protection of the public is but one of four conflicting sets of principles set out in section 3” (at paragraph 45). Section 3(1)(c): 
Section 3(1)(c) of the Youth Criminal Justice Act indicates that “within the limits of fair and proportionate accountability, the measures taken against young persons who commit offences” should “(i) reinforce respect for societal values, (ii) encourage the repair of harm done to victims and the community, (iii) be meaningful for the individual young person given his or her needs and level of development and, where appropriate, involve the parents, the extended family, the community and social or other agencies in the young person’s rehabilitation and reintegration, and (iv) respect gender, ethnic, cultural and linguistic differences and respond to the needs of aboriginal young persons and of young persons with special requirements.” In R. v. S.J.L., 2009 SCC 14 (CanLII), 1 S.C.R. 426, the Supreme Court of Canada indicated that “the effect of the objectives of the [Youth Criminal Justice Act] is that the judge is asked to favour rehabilitation, reintegration and the principle of a fair and proportionate accountability that is consistent with the young person’s reduced level of maturity” (at paragraph 75).  Similarly, in R. v. C.D., (2005), 2005 SCC 78 (CanLII), 203 C.C.C. (3d) 449, the Supreme Court of Canada indicated that "the object and scheme of the YCJA, as well as Parliament's intention in enacting it, all indicate that the YCJA was designed, in part, to reduce over-reliance on custodial sentences for young offenders" (at paragraph 50). Section 38 of Youth Criminal Justice Act: In addition, sections 38(1) and (2) of the Youth Criminal Justice Act set out the following as its purposes and principles of sentencing: (1) The purpose of sentencing under section 42 (youth sentences) is to hold a young person accountable for an offence through the imposition of just sanctions that have meaningful consequences for the young person and that promote his or her rehabilitation and reintegration into society, thereby contributing to the long-term protection of the public. (2) A youth justice court that imposes a youth sentence on a young person shall determine the sentence in accordance with the principles set out in section 3 and the following principles: (a) the sentence must not result in a punishment that is greater than the punishment that would be appropriate for an adult who has been convicted of the same offence committed in similar circumstances; (b) the sentence must be similar to the sentences imposed in the region on similar young persons found guilty of the same offence committed in similar circumstances; (c) the sentence must be proportionate to the seriousness of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the young person for that offence; (d) all available sanctions other than custody that are reasonable in the circumstances should be considered for all young persons, with particular attention to the circumstances of aboriginal young persons; (e) subject to paragraph (c), the sentence must (i) be the least restrictive sentence that is capable of achieving the purpose set out in subsection (1), (ii) be the one that is most likely to rehabilitate the young person and reintegrate him or her into society, and (iii) promote a sense of responsibility in the young person, and an acknowledgement of the harm done to victims and the community; and (f) subject to paragraph (c), the sentence may have the following objectives: (i) to denounce unlawful conduct, and (ii) to deter the young person from committing offences.
  In P.R., the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal held that the “use of the word ‘shall’ in the introductory clause to s. 38(2) and the word ‘must’ and ‘should’ in ss. 38(2)(a) to (e) indicate that youth sentencing judges are required to impose a sentence that is in accordance with the principles in s. 3, as well as the specific sentencing principles enumerated in those provisions. They remind judges to reserve the use of a custodial sentence for the most serious offenders and only when a non-custodial sentence would be unable to ensure meaningful accountability and promote the long-term protection of the public” (at paragraph 66).
  The Court of Appeal also held in P.R. that in “the use of the word ‘may’ in s. 38(2)(f) connotes a permissive, rather than obligatory, consideration of denunciation and deterrence as sentencing objectives for youth offenders. 
Judges are permitted to consider the objectives of denunciation and deterrence – specific deterrence only – when sentencing a youth, however, reliance on either is discretionary…If denunciation and deterrence are considered, they must be considered alongside the other sentencing principles expressed in the preamble, the declaratory principles in s. 3, and the mandatory sentencing principles in s. 38” (at paragraph 67). Deterrence:
  Though the sentencing principle of specific deterrence applies to the sentencing of young offenders, the sentencing principle of general deterrence does   not (see R. v. B.M.S., at paragraph 31). 
This distinction highlights the individualized approach to sentencing mandated by the Youth Criminal Justice Act.  
 
 
The Factors to be Considered in Imposing Sentence:
    Section 38(3) of the Youth Criminal Justice Act requires a youth court judge to consider a number of specific factors in in determining an appropriate sentence: (3) In determining a youth sentence, the youth justice court shall take into account (a) the degree of participation by the young person in the commission of the offence; (b) the harm done to victims and whether it was intentional or reasonably foreseeable; (c) any reparation made by the young person to the victim or the community; (d) the time spent in detention by the young person as a result of the offence; (e) the previous findings of guilt of the young person; and (f) any other aggravating and mitigating circumstances related to the young person or the offence that are relevant to the purpose and principles set out in this section. A Summary of the Approach to Sentencing Young Offenders: 
  In summary, when imposing sentence upon a young offender, a youth court judge must keep in mind the inherent differences between adults and young persons as well as the different approaches to sentencing adopted by the Criminal Code and the Youth Criminal Justice Act.  It is well settled that the sentencing principle of general deterrence does not apply and that a custodial sentence should not be imposed unless there are no reasonable alternatives.  This effectively means that if a young offender has no prior convictions, the imposition of a custodial sentence is unlikely.   
  Though the seriousness of the offence committed by a young person is a key factor in determining if a custodial sentence should be imposed, even when the offence committed is a serious one, a custodial sentence can only be imposed if no other sentence is reasonable. Even when a young offender commits a serious offence, a youth court judge must concentrate on rehabilitation and the long-term effect of the sentence imposed.  
  There is a presumption of a diminished moral blameworthiness for young persons who commits crimes (see R. v. M.M., 2022 NSCA 46, at paragraph 47).   Because young people are capable of great reformation, a long-term approach must normally dominate sentencing decisions.  However, the Youth Criminal Justice Act also requires that any sentence imposed be a “meaningful” one that holds the young offender “accountable” for her or his actions.  
  In determining what sentence should be imposed upon a young person, a sentencing judge must consider: -the need to impose a sentence which is proportionate to the seriousness of the offence; 
-that the Youth Criminal Justice Act is not entirely “offender-centric”; 
-that general deterrence is not applicable; -that both specific deterrence and denunciation are applicable; 
-that any sentence imposed must stress the long term goals of rehabilitation and reintegration; 
-that resort to the sentencing principle of retribution will rarely be appropriate; 
-that all available sanctions other than custody that are reasonable in the circumstances must be considered; and 
-the need through sentencing to protect the public, to promote accountability and to impose a sentence that constitutes a meaningful consequence. The Positions of the Parties:
  The Crown recommended that a period of two years of probation and a community service order be imposed.  Mr. Ashton referred to the offences as “serious”, but noted that BM has no prior convictions and that the Youth Criminal Justice Act favours non-custodial sentencing. 
  On behalf, of BM, Ms. Kirkwood submitted that an appropriate range of sentence would extend from a discharge with conditions to a period of probation.  Ms. Kirkwood referred to the principles of sentencing set out in the Youth Criminal Justice Act; BM’s lack of prior convictions; his lack of charges since the offences; and his prospects for rehabilitation.  
  In support of her position, Ms. Kirkwood referred to my decisions in R. v. R.R., N.J. No. 341 (P.C.) and R. v. J.S., N.J. No. 271 (P.C.). 
  In R.R., the young person was convicted of the offences of assault and uttering a threat.  He assaulted a young girl by punching her in the face and sent text messages to another young girl threatening to harm her and her family.  I imposed a period of twelve months of probation.
  In J.S., the young offender committed the offences of assault (two counts), mischief and breach of undertaking, contrary to sections 145(5.1), 266 and 430(1)(a) of the Criminal Code. I described the circumstances involved in the following manner (at paragraphs 3 to 6): JS assaulted a class mate (AG) at school by punching him in the face on two occasions. JS was arrested and released on an undertaking.  One of the conditions of the undertaking prohibited JS from being at the school unless he was attending a class.
 
On February 5, 2016, JS was at the school.  At the time he was suspended and thus was not attending any classes.  The undertaking referred to was in force at the time.
 
On February 26, 2016, JS assaulted another young person (TP) outside of a mall in Corner Brook by punching him in the face three times. 
 
On July 5, 2016, the police received a complaint from JS’s mother.  When the police went to JS’s residence they discovered that JS had become upset and broke a basement window in the residence and windows in his mother’s motor vehicle.
 
  JS was fifteen years of age and he had no prior convictions.
  I imposed a period of twelve months of probation and ordered JS to perform thirty hours of community service work. I wrote that “[c]onsidering the sentencing options available, the circumstances of the offences committed by JS, and JS’s personal circumstances, I conclude that a period of probation for twelve months is an appropriate sentence.  It will promote JS’s rehabilitation and it is, of the sentence options available, the one which will have the most meaningful consequences” (at paragraph 31).
