./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/pc/2023abpc17.html
              The Offender has been convicted of fraud and transferring proceeds of crime to her own use in the amount of $456,685.13 over a period of 3 years.  The victim was a foundation set up by a real estate brokerage firm to contribute to children’s charities.  The Offender was acting as treasurer to the foundation and therefore was in a trust position involving the foundation.  The evidence and findings of guilt can be found at R v Mann, 2022 ABPC 184.   The fraud involved forging 90 cheques on the foundation account payable to herself and deposited into her own bank account.  The proceeds have never been accounted for and I am advised by counsel they are gone and cannot be located.  As is the usual case in frauds by a person in a position of trust, she has no criminal record.
 
Principles of Sentencing
              Section 718 sets out the purpose and principles of sentencing which is to protect society by:
-          denunciation;
-          deterrence;
-          rehabilitation;
-          providing reparations;
-          promoting a sense of responsibility in Offenders and acknowledgment of the harm done to victims and the community;
-          the sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender;
-          it must account for aggravating or mitigating circumstances;
-          it must consider whether a position of trust was abused;
-          the sentence should be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences committed in similar circumstances (the Parity Principle); and
-          the offender should not be deprived of liberty if less restrictive sanctions are appropriate.
Aggravating Factors
1)                  the amount of money involved $456,685.13;
2)                  the number of transactions being 90 forged cheques often twice a month and sometimes three or four times a month and on consecutive days;
3)                  the fraud continued for over a three-year period;
4)                  the fraud deprived children’s charities of the funds which the foundation was set up to assist which the Offender knew;
5)                  the Offender was in a position of trust as treasurer of the foundation with few if any controls over the foundation funds which allowed the fraud to continue for so long;
6)                  the fraud could have continued indefinitely had the Offender not been terminated for unrelated reasons; and
7)                  the funds were used as personal assets and nothing remains. 
              Section 380.1(1) sets out statutory aggravating circumstances the Court must consider in determining the appropriate sentence.  They are as applied to this case:
1)                  the magnitude, complexity, duration or degree of planning the fraud;
2)                  the Offender took advantage of the high regard in which she was held by the company and the foundation; and
3)                  the significant impact on the victims, the less privileged children, the foundation funds were designed to help.
 
Mitigating factors
              In my view there are none.  Section 380.1(2) prohibits consideration of the Offender’s employment skills, status or reputation in the community since they contributed to enabling the Offender to commit the fraud, many of which are detailed in the Pre-Sentence Report and character letters.  In many of the fraud authorities, the most common mitigating factors are a guilty plea, restitution and remorse.  None are present in this case.
 
Position of the Crown
              The Crown submits the appropriate sentence is four years incarceration for the fraud and one year consecutive for money laundering for a total of five years in a federal penitentiary.  In addition, they seek a fine in lieu of forfeiture in the amount of $450,000 with time to pay of 3 years, and in default, 3 years additional penitentiary time pursuant to sec. 462.37(3) and (4) of the Criminal Code.  Finally, they seek an Order pursuant to sec. 380.2 prohibiting the Offender from being employed, volunteering or having authority over another person’s property or money for a period of 10 years.
 
Position of the Defence
              The defence submits the appropriate sentence is a Conditional Sentence Order for two years less a day for the fraud count followed by a three-year Probation Order, and a one-year Conditional Sentence Order for the money laundering count concurrent to the fraud Conditional Sentence Order.  They propose both the Conditional Sentence Order and Probation Order contain Restitution Orders by installment as well as a Restitution Order under sec. 738 for the amount of the fraud with 10 years time to pay.
 
The Authorities
              Both Crown and defence have provided the Court with a number of authorities to support their position as to the appropriate sentence and to comply with the parity principle.   Therefore, only sentencing authorities for similar offenders committing similar offences in similar circumstances will be of benefit to the Court.  As this case was a finding of guilt of fraud by a person in a position of trust from her employer, authorities where there was a guilty plea are not comparable since a guilty plea receives a significant discount.  Authorities where the fraud involved significantly less funds or significantly more funds are also not useful for comparison purposes.  Cases where the offender was in a significant position of trust in society such as a lawyer are also not useful nor are cases where significant restitution was made.
              The Crown relies on the Alberta Court of Appeal case of R v Davis, 2014 ABCA 115, a Memorandum of Judgment which is not binding but a useful guide.  The Court set out three categories of fraud and the sentences they should attract.  In the first category, they cited three cases as follows.
              R v Bracegirdle, 2004 ABCA 252 was a guilty plea to a $175,000 fraud from her employer, a charitable society; a position of trust with a small amount of restitution was made.  The fraud took place over 5½ years.  She was given a Conditional Sentence Order for two years less a day.  The Court of Appeal substituted a sentence of 2 years less a day actual incarceration saying a conditional sentence does not reflect the appropriate denunciation and deterrence for her crime for which there is no explanation but greed.
          R v Fulcher, 2007 ABCA 381, the fraud was $269,000 over 13 months perpetrated on clients of his employer by forging cheques.  He pled guilty and has made no restitution.  He was sentenced to a Conditional Sentence Order of two years less a day.  The Court of Appeal again substituted a sentence of actual incarceration for the same amount of time.  In doing so, the Court stated at para 44 as follows:
“In crimes of embezzlement, the sentencing goals of denunciation and deterrence take on a particular importance.  If this conditional sentence were left standing, anyone else working in a similar capacity of trust for a similar employer could readily see an obvious blueprint for quick wealth.  It shows how to get hundreds of thousands of dollars almost effortlessly with only the potential burden of a conditional sentence of house arrest to fear.”
          R v Zenari, 2012 ABCA 279 was a fraud of $225,000 by a constable from the Edmonton Police Service by forging signatures of staff sergeants 71 times for overtime claims.  He pled guilty and made restitution.   He was given a Conditional Sentence Order of 2 years less a day.  The Court of Appeal, citing the above quote from Fulcher as binding jurisprudence, called for a custodial sentence in cases of employee theft.  Taking into account the guilty plea and the restitution, a sentence of 18 months actual incarceration was substituted.
          None of these cases in the first category of Davis are applicable to this case because they were all guilty pleas and the amount of the frauds were substantially less.  In addition, some restitution had been made.  What is instructive is that in each case the Court of Appeal overturned Condition Sentence Order sentences as inappropriate in frauds from employees by a person in a trust position.
          The second category of Davis all involve dishonest lawyers with amounts ranging between $700,000 and $2,000,000.  The sentences range between 3 and 4 years actual incarceration.  Again, this case does not fall into those categories because the amounts are much higher and they were lawyers who are in a much higher trust position in society.  The public often have no choice but to deposit funds in a lawyer’s trust account and therefore courts must denounce and deter lawyers from embezzling funds held in trust to promote public confidence by imposing more severe sentences.
          The third category is frauds involving over a million dollars where the range is 7 to 8 years incarceration.  Again, this category does not apply to this case where the fraud is less than half a million dollars.
          The Crown also cites the following cases.  In R v Neilson, 2020 ABQB 556, the fraud was over 1.6 million dollars.  He was convicted after trial and sentenced to 4½ years for the fraud and one year consecutive for money laundering.
          In R v Mella, 2022 ABQB 68, the fraud was 2 million dollars and the sentence was 8 years.  He was convicted after trial.
          In R v Walker, 2016 ABQB 695, the fraud was $315,000.  He pled guilty and received a sentence of 3 years.
          In R v Thiel, 2021 ABPC 286, he pled guilty to a fraud of 1.5 million dollars and was sentenced to 4 years.
          The defence relies on Court of Appeal cases of R v Evanson, 2019 ABCA 122 and a chart of other cases referred to in that case.  Evanson pled guilty to defrauding his employer of $545,773.16 over a 10-year period.  He made full restitution and was sentenced to 14 months imprisonment.  The Court of Appeal increased the sentence to 2 years on the basis that deterrence and denunciation were paramount objectives of sentencing.
          In the chart referred to, only the last two cases are in the same range of the amount of the fraud as in this case; R v Stergiou, 2015 ABCA 35, the amount being $547,000 and R v Jaikaran, 2007 ABCA 98, the amount being $633,000.    In Stergiou, the accused pled guilty, made restitution of half of the amount he defrauded and received a sentence of 18 months imprisonment.  In Jaikaran, the accused pled guilty, made full restitution and received a sentence of 2 years imprisonment.
          In all of the cases, actual incarceration was the sentence.  In any case where a Conditional Sentence Order was the trial court’s sentence, the Court of Appeal overturned it and imposed actual incarceration.
          The maximum sentence for fraud over is 14 years.  The Criminal Code restrictions on conditional sentence orders include offences where the maximum sentences are 14 years or more (sec. 742.1(c)).   Following the Supreme Court’s decision in R v Sharma, (2022) SCC 39, in November, 2022, those restrictions were removed from sec. 742.1(c).  Therefore, a Conditional Sentence Order is available for fraud over.  However, being available does not mean it is an appropriate sentence.  In fact, the Court of Appeal has indicated a fraud by a person in a trust position on their employer requires actual incarceration and a Conditional Sentence Order is not appropriate for reasons set out in Fulcher and Zenari. 
          In Bracegirdle, the Court quoted from R v Reid, 2004 YKCA 4 at para 13:
“Individuals who commit this class of crime, usually plan and deliberate about it to some extent.  Potential offenders in this class of case will, to a greater or lesser degree, be engaged in a process of weighing the risks and benefits.”
At para 42 the Court stated:
“A conditional sentence order cannot reflect appropriate denunciation and deterrence for his crime for which there is no explanation but greed.”
          In Fulcher the Court of Appeal stated at para 30:
“..... absent truly exceptional circumstances, the sentencing goals of deterrence and denunciation demand a sentence of imprisonment rather than the imposition of a conditional sentence for crimes of embezzlement or theft by an employee.”
          Having regard to these Court of Appeal authorities, as I must, it is clear in the circumstances of this case, fraud by a person in a position of trust upon her employer, a conditional sentence order would not have the necessary deterrence or denunciation, either general or specific even if there had been a guilty plea and restitution made and the only appropriate sentence is actual incarceration.
          Defence counsel also raises the issue that the Offender is diabetic and requires daily doses of medication.  A letter from a doctor was submitted detailing the medication she would require should she be incarcerated.  I am satisfied the necessary medication as outlined would be available in an institution.  Being diabetic is treatable unlike some other diseases such as cancer that is terminable or the Offender is elderly and immobile, that has been considered in some cases such as Fulcher, Jaikaran and Walker and did not avoid actual incarceration as a result.
          I find whether or not a sentence of less than 2 years is appropriate or the Offender is not a danger to the community, the two remaining restrictions to the imposition of a conditional sentence order, a conditional sentence order is not the appropriate sentence, only actual incarceration is appropriate.
 
The Length of Incarceration
          The Crown submits 5 years is the appropriate sentence.  The defence submits 2 years less a day is appropriate.
          The Crown’s analysis is based on the second category of Davis which is 3 to 4 years if the offender is a lawyer.  This Offender is not a lawyer and therefore not in that category.  The first category is frauds of less than $250,000 attracting sentences of less than 2 years.  This offender is not in that category either.  In Neilson, the fraud sentence was 4½ years but the fraud was over 1 million dollars, more than twice the fraud here.  In R v Schoer, 2019 ONCA 105, the fraud was $413,500 and the sentence was 4 years.  In R v Walker, 2016 ABQB 695, the fraud was $315,000 and on a guilty plea, the sentence was 3 years.
          I find the range for this case is 3 to 4 years but should not be at the high end of the range which is the category for lawyer fraud.  Given the amount of this fraud over a 3-year period by a person in a position of trust, perpetrated on her employer to the disadvantage of children’s charities, I conclude the fraud sentence should be 3½ years using the principle of parity.
          The Crown submits the sentence for using the proceeds of crime should be another year consecutive.  Two authorities have dealt with this issue.  In Neilson, the court agreed the sentence for using proceeds should be consecutive.  In R v Mella, 2022 ABQB 68, the Court considered Neilson but determined it would be double counting to increase the sentence for money laundering.
          In this case, I find the fraud and the use of the proceeds are one and the same transaction.  The purpose of the fraud was to transfer the monies into her own account to use for her own purposes.  Using the proceeds was synonymous with the fraud.  It should not be treated separately for sentencing purposes.  Therefore, the sentence for using the proceeds will be one year concurrent with the fraud sentence.
 
Fine in Lieu of Forfeiture
          Section 462.37(3) provides for a find in lieu of forfeiture.  Defence acknowledges the proceeds of the fraud are gone and unrecoverable.  Therefore, an Order of Forfeiture would be meaningless.  In that situation, the Court can impose a fine in lieu.  The Crown submits a fine in the amount of the fraud should be imposed with a term of further imprisonment if not paid in accordance with the amount of the fraud as set out in sec. 462.37(4).  For the amount of this fraud sec. 462.37(4)(vi) would apply and the further imprisonment if not paid would be not less than 3 years and not more than 5 years.  The Crown submits time to pay of 3 years would be appropriate.
          The defence submits a restitution order is appropriate but should be a free-standing order under sec. 738.  The problem with a sec. 738 order is there is no incentive to make restitution as there are no consequences if not paid other than the victim filing a Civil Order of Judgment.  Section 462.37(3) is designed to have consequences of incarceration as the incentive to pay the fine.
          I have reviewed the authorities provided by the Crown on this issue, particularly R v Lavigne, 2006 SCC 10, R v Kazman, 2018 ONSC 2332, Neilson, Mella, Schoer, Walker and R v Angelis, 2016 ONCA 675. 
          From those authorities I derived the following principles.  The purpose of the section is to ensure the Offender is deprived of the proceeds of her crime.  Where that purpose cannot be achieved because the proceeds no longer exist, the objective can still be achieved by a fine in lieu.  The ability to pay is not a factor.  The fine is to be the equivalent of the value of the fraud.  Once it is determined the property or money is the proceeds of the crime of which the Offender has been convicted as here, a Forfeiture Order is mandatory as is a fine in lieu.  The only discretion the trial judge has is determining the amount of the proceeds of the crime and the length of time to pay.  The Supreme Court in Lavigne stated:
“ .... the discretion granted under that provision is limited and that ability to pay may not be taken into consideration either in the decision to impose the fine or in the determination of the amount of the fine.”
          The section is designed to ensure crime does not pay, to give teeth to the general sentencing provisions and deter the Offender from committing crimes in the future.  A fine is technically part of the sentence and its purpose is to replace the proceeds of crime, so it is not regarded as punishment specifically for the designated offence.  The mere fact the property consists of cash, and has been used or spent, as here, cannot serve as a way to avoid the fine.  The fine must equal the amount of the cash stolen.
          I have already determined the amount of the fraud taken from the foundation was $456,685.13.  I therefore impose a fine in that amount and using my discretion as granted by the section as to time to pay, make it payable within 5 years of the Offender’s release from the 3½ years of incarceration.  If not paid within that time, the Offender will be incarcerated for an additional 3 years consecutive, pursuant to the minimum time set out in sec. 462.37(4)(vi).  The fine or any part of it if paid is payable to the clerk of court but not into general treasury.  It will be refunded to Colliers to the attention of Mr. Law or his designate to be distributed to the children’s charities the foundation was set up to support.  It was those charities that was deprived of the funds and should benefit from any repayment by way of fine.
 
Order Under Section 380.2
          An Order of Prohibition under this section is appropriate to prevent the Offender from having control over other people’s money or property.  The order will be for a period of 10 years from the date of this sentence which will include both the sentence of incarceration and any time in lieu if the fine is not paid.
 
DNA Order
          I find a DNA Order is not necessary for this type of crime.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Victim Fine Surcharge
          Given the length of incarceration, a victim fine surcharge is not appropriate nor necessary.
