./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/pc/2023abpc7.html
              The accused is charged with sexual interference.
              The female complainant, at the time of the alleged offence was 13 years of age.
              The accused at the time of the alleged offence was 19 years of age.
              It is alleged that the accused, and another individual had cell phone contact with the complainant by way of social media.  In exchange for rides and drugs, the complainant allegedly agreed to engage in sexual activity with the accused on three separate occasions.  
              The defence raised at trial that no sexual activity occurred between the complainant and the accused.
              The main issue in this case is the Court’s assessment of the credibility and reliability of the complainant and another civilian witness who testified at trial in determining if the Crown has proven the case beyond a reasonable doubt.
              For the reasons that follow, the accused is found not guilty.
Charge
              The accused is charged in an Information as follows:
Count 1:  Between the 1st day of November, 2020, and the 31st day of December, 2020, both dates inclusive, at or near Airdrie, Alberta, did, for a sexual purpose, unlawfully touch, directly or indirectly, with a part of the body or with an object, a part of the body of the complainant, a person under the age of sixteen years, contrary to section 151 of the Criminal Code of Canada.
Evidence
              The Crown called two witnesses at trial, the complainant MPP and a female friend of the complainant, MCA.
          No evidence was called by the Defence.
          By consent, the complainant, MPP testified outside the Courtroom byway of CCTV.
          In examination-in-chief she testified that she was currently 15 years old, in Grade 10, and resided in Airdrie Alberta.
          She recalled sitting down with Dr. Sarah MacDonald for an interview in February 2021.  She was unable to remember who arranged the interview.  She initially referred to the doctor as “him”, but then said that she remembered meeting with a female, “Sara” in the Victims Services Building in Calgary.  She confirmed that she had an opportunity to read a transcript of the interview.  
          When asked how old she was in February 2021, she said that she was 13 years old.  When asked if she was telling the truth at the time of the interview, she replied, “Yes, I was telling the truth.”
          At this point, the Crown played video evidence of the interview for the Court.  The CD and accompanying transcript were marked as Exhibit 1-A and Exhibit 1-B.
          After watching the video of her interview, the Complainant again confirmed that she was telling the truth in her interview.  In the video, she talked about three encounters with the Accused.
          In regard to the first encounter, she testified that the first time she was with the Accused she was in Cochrane.  She was taking a medication called Concerta at the time for her ADHD.  She also testified about her drug use at the time, which included marijuana and cocaine usage.  She said that she was addicted to cocaine and used it from ages 11 – 14.  She testified as follows:
Q.        So during this period of time that we’re talking about with the accused, were you taking drugs at that time?
A.         Yes, I was.
 
Q.        Okay, sorry.  Were you taking cocaine at that time?
A.         Not when I saw him, but I was taking it.
          She testified that she met the Accused on “Quick Ad”, which she described as a feature on Snapchat.  She later met the Accused in-person for the first time in Cochrane and performed oral sex on him.  She said that he performed oral sex until he ejaculated in her mouth.  She testified that her pants were off, that her shirt was on, and that the Accused’s pants were off.  She described the penis of the Accused and noted that it was hard.  She said that the Accused tried to put his penis in her.  She said that before the Accused tried to put his penis inside of her, she asked if he could put on a condom, and that he put a condom on.
          In regard to the second encounter, she testified that it occurred before she was arrested.  She said she performed oral sex on the Accused until he ejaculated in her mouth.
          In regard to the third encounter, she testified that she performed oral sex on the Accused until he ejaculated.  She said that she was pretty sure he ejaculated either in her mouth or on her clothes.  In the context of this third encounter, she further mentioned a conversation about her age:
Q.        -you say in there, I told him I was 13, and he – and they didn’t care.  Can you tell us how that conversation came up?
A.         So before they picked me up, I – over text, I have told them, heh, by the way, I don’t know if you know, but I am 13, because I knew that they were 19 and I didn’t know if MCA told them I was 16, but afterwards they did clarify that she did tell them I was 16. So – 
 
Q.        And the third time you’re referring to them, is that JA and the Accused?
A.         Yes.
 
Q.        How did you know that they were – you were texting them?
A.         I knew I was texting them, because I was sending them messages.  I wanted them to pick me up.  I wanted to see them.  It was right after I got out of RSD.  I – you know, that’s it.
 
Q.        Did you receive any text messages back from them?
A.         Yes.  They said that it was okay that I was 13 and that it didn’t really matter.
 
Q.        Okay.  And was there – did you ever have a face-to-face conversation with them about this?
A.         I had a face-to-face conversation with JA after the fact of me being 13.  It was after we dropped off the Accused.
 
          The Complainant attended the courtroom in-person for the purpose of identifying the Accused.
          In cross-examination, she confirmed that she began using cocaine at the age of 11.  She said that she developed an addiction and was using cocaine two or three times per week at the time.  She also smoked marijuana on a regular basis during this time.  She said that she was not working and would get money to bey these drugs from selling marijuana, selling vapes, or would sometimes “go out and try to find people”.  She used both cocaine and marijuana during the time period of November 2020 to the end of December 2020.  
          She testified that she consumed alcohol once or twice a week during this time period.  On these occasions, she would drunk until she was drunk or tipsy.  Defence counsel suggested that her doctor specifically told her not to consume drugs or alcohol while taking her ADHD medication.  She said yes, and that she disregarded their advice.  Defence counsel suggested that her doctor told her that mixing drugs in this way could affect her perception of events and could also affect her memory of events.  She said yes, and that she continued to do so.
          Defence counsel also suggested that she ran away from home during this time period, as well as before and after this time period.  She said yes.  She would also sneak out of the house.  She was asked about contacting people on Snapchat and said she would contact random people on occasion.  In addition to obtaining rides to places from these people, she agreed that she would sometimes obtain marijuana and cocaine from them.  Defence counsel suggested that she was currently facing a charge of robbery in youth court.  She agreed.  One of the people she was charge in connection with was MCA.
          Defence counsel referred to the interview where MPP confessed that she had no memory whatsoever of certain events in her life.  She remembered giving that testimony.  She testified and an Airdrie RCMP officer showed her a picture of the Accused after February of 2021.  Defence counsel suggested that the officer indicated that this was the person who sexually assaulted her.  She agreed.
          In regard to the first encounter with the Accused, she testified that the meeting was arranged through MCA.  She was having a sleepover at MCA’s, and MCA wanted to go to Calgary.  She said that she had contact with the Accused over Snapchat, before meeting him.  She testified that the Accused added her on Snapchat.  She referenced “Quick Ad”, but Defence counsel put to her that she didn’t know how the Accused added her.  She agreed.  
          She testified that she met JA in-person before she met the Accused.  Defence counsel suggested that she had a crush on JA, because she would do things like take pictures of herself and JA, send those pictures to MCA, and talked to MCA about how much she liked JA.  She said that was true, but that she was lying to MCA about having a crush on JA.  She said that MCA was one of her best friends, and that she had lied to make herself feel better in the moment.  Defence counsel suggested that she lies to people to feel better about herself.  She admitted to this.  Defence counsel also suggested that one of the things she continually liked to people about during this time period was her age.  She agreed.
          Defence counsel suggested that she lied about her age to MCA who was 16 years old, continually telling MCA that she was 16 or older.  She disagreed and said this was not true.
          In regard to the first encounter, she testified that she met the Accused at a church in Cochrane when the Accused got into JA’s vehicle.  They discussed going to a spot overlooking the city, and then she left with the Accused and went into the passenger seat of his vehicle.  She said that MCA and JA remained in JA’s vehicle.
          Defence counsel pointed out a difference between this testimony and her interview.  In the interview, she had said that she got into the Accused’s car, and they agreed to go to a spot overlooking the city.  She acknowledged this difference, and then testified that MCA and JA also drove up to the overlook at the same time in JA’s vehicle.  She believed that JA and MCA were having sex in JA’s vehicle while she was having sexual contact with the Accused in the Accused’s vehicle.
          She testified that she performed oral sex on the Accused.  She said they were in the backseat of a gray minivan with sliding doors that the Accused was driving.  She said that he produced the condom.  She testified that he attempted to have sex wit her, but that it was too painful.  Prior to the sexual encounter, she had been smoking marijuana.  She thought she had one or two bowls, about a gram of leaf marijuana.  She testified that she was high by the time she got to Cochrane.  Defence counsel suggested that she was telling people during this time that she was 16 years old.  She agreed.  Defence counsel suggested that she didn’t really recall what happened after the sexual contact, and she agreed.  
          In regard to the second encounter, she testified that this was the second time she had sexual contact with the accused and that it occurred the same night in November she was ultimately arrested by the Airdrie RCMP.  She contacted the Accused on Snapchat, and he came to pick her up from her house.  Defence counsel suggested that she lied to her mother, saying she was going to a friend’s house for a sleepover, and that she had someone phone her mother and pretend to be her friend’s father.  She agreed.  The Accused picked her up and drover to a 7-11 store to pick up MCA and a friend named JB.  After dropping both JB and MCA off around 5 pm, she and the Accused stopped at a church parking lot in Airdrie and had sexual contact before going to a house to sell someone marijuana.
          After the sexual contact, she smoked marijuana using a bong and “greened out”.  She testified this meant that she was vomiting, and it made her sick, but that she was “sober enough”.  She said that she and the Accused picked up MCA from work around 8pm.  She testified that JA showed up at some point.  Defence suggested that she was having difficulty recalling the time JA arrived because of the amount of marijuana she had consumed that night.  She agreed.  She and the Accused picked up a friend of MCA’s, than went to MCA’s other friend’s house where they sat in the Accused’s vehicle.  The Complainant, the Accused, MCA and a person name SC drove to Croxford High School around 11pm and met up with two males.  She testified that she, together with the people she was with, tried to rob the two males of 130 single sue tobacco capes (or “puff bars”).  The Complainant, the Accused, MCA and a person named SC then went to a skate park where they were arrested by the RCMP.
          She was arrested and taken into custody at the RCMP detachment.  The next day her mother picked her up from the RCMP detachment.  She testified that she told her mother about the “puff bars” but that she was too scared to tell her that she “had sex”.  Defence counsel suggested that throughout this time, she was again telling people she was 16.  She denied this.  Defence counsel suggested that she continued to lie to her mother during this time period and that she ran away to contact peoples she knew she shouldn’t be contacting.  She agreed.
          In regard to the third encounter, she testified that it occurred four days before Christmas.  She said that she stole her mother’s phone, snuck out of her window, and ran away from home.  Defence suggested that she was lying to people about her age, including MCA.  She denied this several times.  She then said that when she did tell “them” she was 13 they didn’t care.  She testified that she used her mother’s phone and messaged them that she was 13.  Defence counsel suggested that her mother had taken Snapchat off her phone, but she denied this.  She testified that she Snapchatted JA first and told him she was only 13.  She said that JA told her he did not care.  She testified that she used her mother’s phone to text the Accused that she was 13.  Defence counsel put to her that she felt it was necessary to tell the Accused that she was only 13, despite telling the Court earlier that the Accused already knew she was 13.  She agreed.
          She testified that the Accused and JA picked her up from her house on that third encounter.  That Accused and JA picked her up in JA’s vehicle.  They then drove into Calgary, and she testified that she performed oral sex on the Accused until he ejaculated in her mouth.  She testified that this sexual encounter occurred by a school in the back seat of the vehicle while JA was in the front seat.  She said that JA drove the Accused home and that they went to Superstore where JA was shovelling snow.  She remained in the vehicle and used her mother’s phone to text friends until it died.  Defence counsel put to her that in her interview she said that the RCMP phones at some point, and that this was not true.  She agreed.  She then clarified that she charged her phone afterwards when they were driving and that she was at JA’s house when the RCMP called.
          Defence counsel then put a number of suggestions to the Complainant:  
Q.        ...what I’m going to suggest to you is this.  You met my client, the Accused, on one occasion and one occasion only and that was the time in November when you were arrested by the police in Airdrie; isn’t that true?
A.         No.
 
Q.        And at no time did my client ever have any form of sexual contact with you; isn’t that true?
A.         God.
 
Q.        He did not allow you to perform oral sex on him, did he?
A.         Yes, he did.
 
Q.        He did not attempt to penetrate you vaginally, did he?
A.         Yes, he did.
 
Q.        I’m suggesting he didn’t and that, again this story you told SD and that you’ve told the Court is one of these lies you make up on the spur of the moment to better your situation, isn’t that true?
A.        Yes.
Q.        Yes. Okay. Thank you.
 
          In re-examination, the Complainant said that she was in grade eight in November and December of 2020.  She said that MCA was in grade eleven.  She testified that the first time she was with the Accused in Cochrane she was with him for about an hour and a half.  The second time she was with him, she was with him for more than five hours.  The third time she was with him, she was with him for two hours.
          By consent, MCA testified outside the Courtroom by way of CCTV.
          In examination-in-chief, she testified she was 17 years old, in grade 12, and resides in Airdrie, Alberta.
          In November and December of 2020, she was in high school in grade eleven.  She testified that she knows MPP.  She could not remember how they met, but thought it was through friends in Airdrie.  She said that she met the Accused and JA through a friend named SC.  She met them in-person with MPP in Airdrie near a 7-11 store.  She testified that this first meeting occurred around two years ago in the winter, or maybe between summer and winter.  They drove around, went to a girl named KD’s house, dropped her off, and then went to the skate park.  There were police at the skate park, and everyone was detained.
          Crown counsel asked if this was the first time she had met JA and the Accused.  She said it was.  She said they were with them around two hours before they were detained.  Crown counsel asked if she ever saw JA and that Accused after that date.  She testified that she saw JA once with MPP and SC, around three weeks after that date.  She also said that there was another time where MPP was alone with JA, and that she was not there.  
          When asked if there was ever a time where she and MPP were with JA and the Accused, she said there was a time at Nose Hill Park.  She testified this occurred on a different date from the date they were detained.
Q.        Okay.  Tell us about the second time?
A.         I think I was in Calgary with MPP.  She was staying with me at EF’s, one of my friends I was staying with at the time.  And they picked us up and then we drove around down town and then went to the view spot.
 
Q.        You went to that spot?
A.         Yeah.  And then we got to go back to EF’s house.  And they dropped us off at EF’s.
 
...
 
Q.        Okay.  So you and MPP were with JA and the Accused?
A:        M-hm.
 
Q.        And you went to a spot in Nose Hill, is that what you were saying?
A.         Yeah.
 
Q.        Okay.  What vehicle were you in?  What kind of vehicle were you in?
A.         JA’s was a truck, I think it was – it was a four door.  I can’t remember the colour.  And then the Accused I believe was driving a car.
 
Q.        Okay.  So there were two separate cars.  And what – what happened up there where – 
A.         the reason – the reason I think they were in separate cars is because the Accused lived in Cochrane and then JA lives in Calgary.  So then JA is closer to me and MPP and then we kind of just all met up, if that makes sense.  
 
Q.        Okay.
A.         Like he drove from Cochrane.
 
          She said that JA picked them up from EF’s house, which was really close to Nose Hill “like a five-minute drive almost”.  She said that JA was driving a truck, and that it was a four door.  She also said that she believed the Accused was driving a car, and that he drove in from where he lived in Cochrane.  The Accused met up with them at Nose Hill.  She said they “blasted music for a bit and then they had to go”.  She testified that she thought MPP asked JA to driver her to Airdrie, and that she was not sure where the Accused went.  
          When asked how long they were at Nose Hill, she said that she thought they were at Nose Hill for 45 minutes.  She testified that MPP was with her in JA’s vehicle.  When asked when this encounter took place, she was unsure but thought it was two weeks after the first meeting.
          Crown counsel asked if she knew how old MPP was.  She testified that MPP was always lying about her age.  She said that MPP claimed to be 15 or 16, but that she found out when they were detained that she was 13 or 14.  She testified that she did not know MPP’s age before they were detained.  Crown counsel suggested to her that she spoke to MPP at a time when they got arrested again.  She denied this.  She said that she talked to MPP during that time period when she was alone with JA.  She said that MPP called her on Facetime, sitting in the truck, and that MPP said she was with JA outside of Superstore.  She asked MPP to come to EF’s house where she was staying but did not hear from her for days.  
          She testified that she worked at Michael’s in Airdrie at the time.  She said that she and MPP had gotten in trouble with the police since that time, referencing a robbery.
          MCA attended the courtroom in-person for the purpose of identifying the Accused.
          In cross-examination, Defence counsel suggested that MPP would frequently lie to her.  She agreed.  She also agreed that MPP would lie to her about her age.  She testified that when she met MPP, MPP told her and other people that she was 15 turning 16.  She testified that she did not find out until after the last time she saw the Accused that MPP was only 13.  She said that MPP was very manipulative.
          She testified that she was with MPP the first time she met the Accused.  Defence counsel suggested to her this first meeting occurred towards the middle or end of November of 2020.  She agreed that it was around October or November.  She testified that at this first meeting JA was driving his truck and that the Accused was driving a small, four door car.  She said that she, MPP, the Accused, JA, and SC all went to her friend KD’s house.  She did not remember working at Michael’s that evening.  She testified that they did not meet up with another group of people.  She said they did not get in a fight with anybody, although she mentioned an argument at the skate park.  At this time, she said they were all in the car that the Accused was driving.  She said that she was in the middle back seat, with SC to her left and MPP to her right.  She said that the Accused was in the driver’s seat and JA was in the passenger seat.
          She testified that the RCMP came to the skate park, and that she received information which led her to believe the car the Accused was driving may have been stolen.  They were all detained and taken to the RCMP detachment.  She said that Madison was there for around 45 minutes, and that she was there for around an hour and a half.
          She said that the next time she was with MPP and saw the Accused, that it occurred in Calgary.  She said that JA picked her and MPP up and they drove to Nose Hill Park.  She said that the Accused met them at Nose Hill and that he was driving a Jeep or a green car, but could not remember the vehicle specifically.  She testified that she, MPP and JA were in JA’s truck, and then the Accused either came into the truck or they went into the Accused’s vehicle.  
          She testified that she had contact with MPP about three days after the Nose Hill Park encounter.  Defence counsel suggested that she also talked to MPP in December when MPP told her she was in JA’s vehicle.  She testified that she did not have a romantic relationship with JA.  Defence counsel suggested to her that MPP had a crush on JA.  She agreed, noting that MPP said she found both JA and the Accused attractive.  She also testified that MPP sent her one selfie of her with JA.  She said that she understood the Accused used a couple of different names, including Timothy and Ira.  
          In re-examination, Crown counsel asked her to clarify what she meant when she called MPP manipulative in cross-examination.  She said that MPP was manipulative in that she would say one thing and do the complete opposite.  She also said there were many times she would lie, and that she never knew whether to believe her or not.  
          Crown counsel also asked about the argument t the skate park.  She testified that everyone, including MPP, were yelling at her because it was her idea to go to the skate park and then the police found the car.
Issue
          After a proper assessment of the credibility and reliability of the two Crown witnesses who testified at trial, has the Crown proven beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused committed the offence of sexual interference as alleged in the Information?
Law and Analysis
Relevant Legislation
          Sections 150.1(1) and 151 of the Criminal Code state as follows:
150.1(1) Subject to subsections (2) to (2.2), when an accused is charged with an offence under section 151 or 152 or subsection 153(1), 160(3) or 173(2) or is charged with an offence under section 271, 272 or 273 in respect of a complainant under the age of 16 years, it is not a defence that the complainant consented to the activity that forms the subject-matter of the charge.
151 Every person who, for a sexual purpose, touches, directly or indirectly, with a part of the body or with an object, any part of the body of a person under the age of 16 years 
(a)   is guilty of an indicatable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than 14 years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of one year; or 
(b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction and is liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than two years less a day and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of 90 days.
Case Law – Applicable Principle
Element of the Offence of Sexual Interference
          in R v BJT, 2019 ONCA 694, Feldman, JA, delivering the judgment of the Court, at para. 37 succinctly summed up the elements of the offence as follows:
 The offence of sexual interference under s. 151 of the Criminal Code is made out when the accused, for a sexual purpose, directly or indirectly touches the body of a person who is under 16 years old.  It is a specific intent offence, meaning that the offender must specifically intend that the touching is for a sexual purpose.  The offender may also have another purpose or reason for the touching, but if he or she also has a sexual purpose, the offence is made out.
Assessment of the Credibility and Reliability of Witnesses
          In R v M.(A.), 2014 ONCA 769, the Court at paras. 8-20 stated as follows:
The governing principles
Several basic principles inform our decision regarding the trial judge's reasons for judgment.
First, every witness, irrespective of age, is an individual whose credibility and evidence should be assessed according to criteria appropriate to his or her mental development, understanding and ability to communicate: R. v. W. (R.), 1992 CanLII 56 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 122, S.C.J. No. 56, at p. 134 S.C.R.
Second, no inflexible rules mandate when a witness' evidence should be evaluated according to “adult” or “child” standards. Indeed, in its provisions regarding testimonial capacity, the Canada Evidence Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. C-5 eschews any reference to “adult” or “child”, preferring the terms “14 years or older” and “under 14 years of age”. An inflexible, category-based system would resurrect stereotypes as rigid and unyielding as those rejected by the recent developments in our approach to children's evidence: W. (R.), at p. 134 S.C.R.
Third, despite this flexibility, there are some guiding principles. Generally, where an adult testifies about events that occurred when she was a child, her credibility should be assessed according to the criteria applicable to adult witnesses. However, the presence of inconsistencies, especially on peripheral matters such as time and location, should be considered in the context of her age at the time the events about which she is testifying occurred: W. (R.), at p. 134 S.C.R.  See, also, R. v. Kendall, 1962 CanLII 7 (SCC), S.C.R. 469, S.C.J. No. 27.
Fourth, one of the most valuable means of assessing witness credibility is to examine the consistency between what the witness said in the witness box and what she has said on other occasions, whether or not under oath: R. v. G. (M.), 1994 CanLII 8733 (ON CA), O.J. No. 2086, 93 C.C.C. (3d) 347 (C.A.), at p. 354 C.C.C., leave to appeal to S.C.C. refused S.C.C.A. No. 390. Inconsistencies may emerge in a witness' testimony at trial, or between their trial testimony and statements previously given. Inconsistencies [page540] may also emerge from things said differently at different times, or from omitting to refer to certain events at one time while referring to them on other occasions.
Inconsistencies vary in their nature and importance. Some are minor, others are not. Some concern material issues, others peripheral subjects. Where an inconsistency involves something material about which an honest witness is unlikely to be mistaken, the inconsistency may demonstrate a carelessness with the truth about which the trier of fact should be concerned: G. (M.), at p. 354 C.C.C.
Fifth, a trial judge giving reasons for judgment is neither under the obligation to review and resolve every inconsistency in a witness' evidence, nor respond to every argument advanced by counsel: R. v. M. (R.E.), 3 S.C.R. 3, S.C.J. No. 52, 2008 SCC 51, at para. 64. That said, a trial judge should address and explain how she or he has resolved major inconsistencies in the evidence of material witnesses: G. (M.), at p. 356 C.C.C.; R. v. Dinardo, 1 S.C.R. 788, S.C.J. No, 24, 2008 SCC 24, at para. 31.
Sixth, prior consistent statements of a witness are not admissible for their truth: R. v. Stirling, 1 S.C.R. 272, S.C.J. No. 10, 2008 SCC 10, at para. 7. Mere repetition of a story on a prior occasion does not make the in-court description of the events any more credible or reliable: R. v. Curto, O.J. No. 889, 2008 ONCA 161, 230 C.C.C. (3d) 145, at paras. 32, 35; R. v. Ay, 1994 CanLII 8749 (BC CA), B.C.J. No. 2024, 93 C.C.C. (3d) 456 (C.A.), at p. 471 C.C.C.
Seventh, in reviewing reasons for sufficiency, we must ask ourselves whether the reasons, taken as a whole and considered with
-- the evidentiary record;
-- the submissions of counsel; and
-- the live issues at trial
reveal the basis for the verdict reached: M.(R.E.), at para. 55; R. v. Vuradin, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 639, [2013] S.C.J. No. 38, 2013 SCC 38, at paras. 12, 15.
Eighth, where a case turns largely on determinations of credibility, the sufficiency of reasons must be considered in light of the deference generally afforded to trial judges on credibility findings. It is rare for deficiencies in a trial judge's credibility analysis, as expressed in the reasons for judgment, to warrant appellate intervention: Vuradin, at para. 11; Dinardo, at para. 26. [page541]
Nevertheless, the failure of a trial judge to sufficiently articulate how credibility and reliability concerns are resolved may constitute reversible error: Vuradin, at para. 11; Dinardo, at para. 26; R. v. Braich, 1 S.C.R. 903, S.C.J. No. 29, 2002 SCC 27, at para. 23. After all, an accused is entitled to know why the trial judge had no reasonable doubt about his or her guilt: R. v. Gagnon, 1 S.C.R. 621, S.C.J. No. 17, 2006 SCC 17, at para. 21.
Similarly, we take it as self-evident that a legal error made in the assessment of credibility may displace the deference usually afforded to a trial judge's credibility assessment and may require appellate intervention.
Finally, when evaluating a trial judge's credibility analysis, there is no principled reason to distinguish between cases involving oath against oath from those in which no competing oath has been offered.
          In R v D.S., 2015 ABPC 159, this Court summarized some helpful guidelines to assist in the assessment of the credibility and reliability of witnesses at para. 61 as follows:
1.      The issue of credibility is one of fact and cannot be determined by following a set of rules that have the force of law.
2.      The general integrity and intelligence of the witness, his power to observe, his capacity to remember and his accuracy in statement are important.
3.      Was the witness honestly endeavouring to tell the truth? Was he sincere and frank, or was he biased, non-responsive, reticent and/or evasive?
4.      Was the evidence given by the witness reasonable and consistent in itself or self-contradictory?
5.      Was the witness shaken on cross-examination? Did the witness make any prior inconsistent statements?
6.      Although the demeanor of a witness in the witness box is a factor that should be considered, it is wrong to equate credible demeanour with reliability and accuracy particularly where there is significant evidence contradicting the witness. All the evidence must be considered. Just because the witness is credible does not mean that his evidence is reliable.
          Finally, the distinction between the credibility and reliability of witnesses is important to this case.
          In R v G.F., 2021 SC 20, Karaktasanis J., delivering the majority judgment of the Court at para. 82 stated as follows:
          Credibility findings must also be assessed in light of the presumption of the correct application of the law, particularly regarding the relationship between reliability and credibility. The jurisprudence often stresses the distinction between reliability and credibility, equating reliability with the witness’ ability to observe, recall, and recount events accurately, and referring to credibility as the witness’ sincerity or honesty: see, e.g., R. v. H.C., 2009 ONCA 56, 244 O.A.C. 288, at para. 41.  However, under a functional and contextual reading of trial reasons, appellate courts should consider not whether the trial judge specifically used the words “credibility” and “reliability” but whether the trial judge turned their mind to the relevant factors that go to the believability of the evidence in the factual context of the case, including truthfulness and accuracy concerns. A trial judge’s determination to accept or believe inculpatory witness evidence includes an implicit assessment of truthfulness or sincerity and accuracy or reliability: Vuradin, at para. 16. Often, the term “credibility” is used in this broader sense to mean the believability of the evidence and it necessarily includes both truthfulness and accuracy: McWilliams’ Canadian Criminal Evidence (5th ed. (loose-leaf)), vol. 3, at pp. 30‑1 and 30‑2. For example, Black’s Law Dictionary (11th ed. 2019), at p. 463, defines credibility as “[t]he quality that makes something (as a witness or some evidence) worthy of belief” and model jury instructions include both truthfulness and accuracy within “credibility” assessments: G. A. Ferguson and M. R. Dambrot, CRIMJI: Canadian Criminal Jury Instructions (4th ed. (loose‑leaf)). Provided trial judges turn their mind to these considerations, there is no requirement that they utter the word “reliable”.
Proof Beyond a Reasonable Doubt
          The SCC has dealt with the traditional language of proof beyond a reasonable doubt in the following cases: R v Lifchus, (1997) 9 C.R. (5th) l; R v Starr, (2000) 2000 SCC 40 (CanLII), 147 CCC (3d) 449, and R v Squires, (2003) 2002 SCC 82 (CanLII), 171 CCC (3d) 226.
          In Lifchus, Cory J., at para. 39 stated as follows:
    Instructions pertaining to the requisite standard of proof in a criminal trial of proof beyond a reasonable doubt might be given along these lines:
The accused enters these proceedings presumed to be innocent.  That presumption of innocence remains throughout the case until such time as the Crown has on the evidence put before you satisﬁed you beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused is guilty.
What does the expression “beyond a reasonable doubt” mean?
The term “beyond a reasonable doubt” has been used for a very long time and is part of our history and traditions of justice. It is so engrained in our criminal law that some think it needs no explanation, yet something must be said regarding its meaning.
A reasonable doubt is not an imaginary or frivolous doubt. It must not be based upon sympathy or prejudice. Rather, it is based on reason and commons sense. It is logically derived from the evidence or absence of evidence. 
Even if you believe the accused is probably guilty or likely guilty, that is not sufﬁcient. In those circumstances you must give the beneﬁt of the doubt to the accused an acquit because the Crown has failed to satisfy you of the guilt of the accused beyond a reasonable doubt.
On the other hand you must remember that it is virtually impossible to prove anything to an absolute certainty and the Crown is not required to do so. Such a standard of proof is impossibly high. 
In short if, based upon the evidence before the court, you are sure that the accused committed the offence you should convict since this demonstrates that you are satisﬁed on his guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
 Application of Principles
          In assessing the credibility of the complainant MMP in this case, her demeanour as a witness is of concern.  Rather than projecting as a witness endeavouring to be truthful, she appeared to respond to questions with a tendency to prevaricate.  It didn’t appear to me that she cared about telling the truth.  She had a story fixed in her mind and that was what she conveyed to the Court.
          In assessing the reliability of the complainant MMP in this case, the Court cannot ignore the admission she made during the time frame of the alleged offence.  She was using alcohol and drugs.  She was addicted to cocaine.  She craved cannabis to the point that during one of the alleged sexual encounters with the accused, she “greened out” or overdosed on its consumption.  She admitted suffering memory lapses because of her alcohol and drug use.  She admitted lying, not only to her mother, but to her friends.  She lied to everyone around her so she could manipulate them.  
          In assessing both her credibility and reliability as a witness in this case, the Court also notes that her evidence as to the alleged sexual encounters with the accused is inconsistent with the evidence given by her female friend MCA.  MCA gave no evidence of any sexual encounter between MPP and the accused.  I have no reason not to accept the evidence given by MCA as being both credible and reliable.  She did not suffer from the same drug addiction, loss of memory and manipulative behaviour displayed by the complainant.
          The critical end to the Court’s assessment of the credibility and reliability of MPP as a witness is her own admission on cross-examination by Defence Counsel that she lied not only in her interview with Detective Sarah MacDonald, but also to the Court to better her situation.
          I don’t think I need say more.
          The complainant MPP is neither a credible nor a reliable witness.  
          There being no other evidence in this case, on Count 1 contained in the Information, the accused is found not guilty.
