./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/pc/2023abpc8.html
              On Information 221135031P1, Mr. Kruger is charged as follows:
Count 1: On or about the 22nd day of July, 2022, at or near Calgary, Alberta, did unlawfully wound, maim, disfigure, or endanger the life of Kelly Okeynan, thereby committing an aggravated assault, contrary to section 268 of the Criminal Code of Canada.
Count 2: On or about the 11th day of August, 2022, at or near Calgary, Alberta, did unlawfully assault Kelly Okeynan, contrary to section 266 of the Criminal Code of Canada. 
Count 3: On or about the 11th day of August, 2022, at or near Calgary, Alberta, did wrongfully and without lawful authority, for the purpose of compelling Kelly Okeynan to abstain from doing anything that he or she had a lawful right to do, or to do anything that he or she has a lawful right to abstain from doing, use violence or threats of violence to that person or their intimate partner or children, or injure the person’s property, contrary to section 423(1)(a) of the Criminal Code of Canada. 
              The Crown proceeded by way of indictment.  Mr. Kruger elected trial in the Provincial Court of Alberta and pleaded “not guilty”.  
              Mr. Kruger has applied, relying on section 591(3)(a) of the Criminal Code, for an order that he be tried on count 1 separately from counts 2 and 3.
              I granted that application on January 9, 2023 and promised written reasons for that decision.  These are those Reasons.
              A reference in these Reasons to a section number is, unless the contrary is stated, a reference to that section in the Criminal Code.
Analysis
              Section 591(3)(a) states:
“(3) The court may, where it is satisfied that the interests of justice so require, order (a) that the accused or defendant be tried separately on one or more of the counts….”
              “A motion to sever under s. 591(3)(a) of the Code must be brought by the accused, who bears the burden of establishing on a balance of probabilities that the interests of justice require an order for severance”:  R. v. Arp 1998 CanLII 769 (SCC), 3 SCR 339, at paragraph 52.
              In 2009, the Supreme Court of Canada set out a non-exhaustive list of factors to be considered by a court as it works towards determining whether a particular applicant has met his or her onus under the section.  At paragraphs 16-18 of R. v. Last 2009 SCC 45 (CanLII), 3 SCR 146, Justice Deschamp, speaking for the entire panel of the Court, said:
The ultimate question faced by a trial judge in deciding whether to grant a severance application is whether severance is required in the interests of justice, as per s. 591(3) of the Code. The interests of justice encompass the accused’s right to be tried on the evidence admissible against him, as well as society’s interest in seeing that justice is done in a reasonably efficient and cost-effective manner. The obvious risk when counts are tried together is that the evidence admissible on one count will influence the verdict on an unrelated count.
Courts have given shape to the broad criteria established in s. 591(3) and have identified factors that can be weighed when deciding whether to sever or not. The weighing exercise ensures that a reasonable balance is struck between the risk of prejudice to the accused and the public interest in a single trial.  It is important to recall that the interests of justice often call for a joint trial.  Litchfield, where the Crown was prevented from arguing the case properly because of an unjudicial severance order, is but one such example. Severance can impair not only efficiency but the truth-seeking function of the trial.
The factors identified by the courts are not exhaustive. They simply help capture how the interests of justice may be served in a particular case, avoiding an injustice. Factors courts rightly use include: the general prejudice to the accused; the legal and factual nexus between the counts; the complexity of the evidence; whether the accused intends to testify on one count but not another; the possibility of inconsistent verdicts; the desire to avoid a multiplicity of proceedings; the use of similar fact evidence at trial; the length of the trial having regard to the evidence to be called; the potential prejudice to the accused with respect to the right to be tried within a reasonable time; and the existence of antagonistic defences as between co‑accused persons: R. v. E. (L.) (1994), 1994 CanLII 1785 (ON CA), 94 C.C.C. (3d) 228 (Ont. C.A.), at p. 238; R. v. Cross (1996), 1996 CanLII 5992 (QC CA), 112 C.C.C. (3d) 410 (Que. C.A.), at p. 419; R. v. Cuthbert (1996), 1996 CanLII 8341 (BC CA), 106 C.C.C. (3d) 28 (B.C.C.A.), at para. 9, aff’d 1997 CanLII 397 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 8 (sub nom. R. v. C. (D.A.)).
              In the case at bar, there are two sets of allegations.  Very briefly stated, there is an allegation that on July 22, 2022, the accused used a weapon in assaulting the complainant (Count 1). There is an allegation that on August 11, 2022, the accused assaulted the complainant, and threatened him (Counts 2 and 3). On that occasion, it is alleged that the accused called the complainant “a rat”.
          The issues raised by the accused in support of his application to sever count 1 from counts 2 and 3 are as follows:
(1) If the accused were to testify, and if the trier of fact found him not to be credible in relation to the July 22 allegations, might that finding improperly affect the trier of fact’s assessment of the accused’s credibility in relation to the August 11 allegations?  This will be a judge alone trial.  Judges are experienced in applying the rules of evidence.  As stated in R. v. JCL 2012 ONSC 6603 at paragraph 15: “…Although the risk of tainted reasoning exists, where there is a judge alone trial as here, it is largely minimized.”  In R. v. JCL, supra, Justice Hennessy concluded (at paragraph 44): “The defendant has shown there is some risk of prejudice arising from the possibility of tainted reasoning. There is no reason to entertain this risk when there are no obvious or at best minimal benefits to a joint trial.  Where there are minimal benefits arising from a joint trial and some risk of prejudice to the accused arising from a joint trial, it is in the interests of justice to sever the counts as requested by the defendant.”  In the case at bar, I find that the risk of tainted reasoning in relation to credibility to be very low.
(2) Counsel for the accused submitted that “it is anticipated that Mr. Kruger will testify with respect to the aggravated assault charge…and articulate a defence of self-defence.  It is not anticipated that Mr. Kruger will give evidence with respect to the acts complained of under Counts 2 and 3….”.  I respectfully adopt the comments of Justice Yamauchi in R. v. Cooper 2011 ABQB 316, at paragraph 57: “The Applicant’s stated intention to testify on one count but not another is a fact that deserves significant weight. However, it is not determinative in a severance application: Last at para 27. This Court must decide whether that stated intention is objectively justifiable or, even if it is, whether this stated intention is outweighed by other factors that show that the interests of justice require a joint trial: Cross at paras 49-54. Last at para. 26, reminds us that ‘[t]he burden on the accused is to provide the trial judge with sufficient information to convey that, objectively, there is substance to his testimonial intention.’ The Applicant has met that requirement.”  In the case at bar, I too am satisfied that the accused’s stated “testimonial intention” is objectively reasonable. Requiring the accused to have one trial in respect of all three counts on the Information will likely require him to make a choice between his section 11(c) Charter right to silence in respect of counts 2 and 3, and his section 650(3) right to make full answer and defence in respect of count 1.  I make one additional comment on this aspect of the severance application.  The Crown submitted that I could address the accused’s concerns by restricting the Crown’s ability to cross-examine the accused; that is, I could prevent the Crown from cross-examining the accused on matters related to Counts 2 and 3.  With respect, I am of the view that such an approach would be troublesome. First, as will be seen below, the Crown sees a connection between Count 1 and Counts 2 and 3. It would therefore be difficult for the Crown to treat these matters as watertight compartments. Second, the right of cross-examination is to be jealously guarded (see: R. v. Lyttle 2004 SCC 5; R. v. Shearing 2002 SCC 58; R. v. AJR [1994] 2 OR (3d) 405 (ONCA); R. v. Fast 2022 ABCA 33).  An improper restriction of the right to cross-examine will often lead to an order for a new trial: R. v. RV 2019 SCC 41.  In the case at bar, there seems to be no compelling reason to artificially restrict the Crown’s right to cross-examine when there is an alternate, and, in this case, not disruptive, course of action (severance of the counts) which will preserve both the rights of the accused and the Crown.
          The Crown submitted that there are other concerns which weigh against granting a severance order:
(1) The similarities between (a) the events alleged in Count 1, and (b) the events alleged in Counts 2 and 3, are that the accused and the complainant are the same. The Crown submitted that the utterance of the word “rat” by the accused towards the complainant referred to the incident alleged in Count 1. The Crown submitted (in its written material): “The Crown cannot prove the essential element of intent in relation to count 3 without making reference to count 1. It is necessary for the Court to have context in order to understand what is being alleged. The essential element of count 3 relates to count 1 in examining mens rea of the accused when he allegedly referred to the victim as a ‘rat’ prior to the assault…The Crown does not advance the factual connection between these counts based on similar fact evidence. Rather the reliability of the evidence pertains to extrinsic misconduct in order to establish intent on count 3 and challenge credibility on count 1 (should the accused advance that defence).” In my view, holding a trial for Count 1 separate from the trial held for Counts 2 and 3 will neither prevent, nor greatly inconvenience, the Crown in the effective prosecution of these matters. Evidence of “context” can be easily led in a trial on Counts 2 and 3. 
(2) Two trials will take longer than one trial.  That may be true, but, in the facts of this case, the additional time needed for two trials is not significant.  
          To be complete, I note that the Crown has fairly noted that it does not intend to rely on similar fact evidence.  I also note that in the facts of this case, there is no concern about inconsistent verdicts.
          When I assess all the relevant factors, I am satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, that it is in the interests of justice that count 1 be severed from counts 2 and 3.  An order for severance will not materially inconvenience either the Crown or the Court system, and it will protect the accused’s right to make full answer in defence, and to exercise his rights under section 11(c) of the Charter.
