./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/pc/2023abpc1.html
              The accused is charged with assaulting causing bodily harm to a polling station volunteer at a school set up for voting on election day, September 20, 2021.  He is also charged with mischief by interfering with the complainant in his duties at the polling station.  The Crown called five witnesses, two from the school, the complainant and the two police officers who responded to the complaint.  The defence called the accused.
Facts in Evidence
              On election day, a polling station was set up at a school called Hidden Valley elementary school in Northwest Calgary.  The school has 400 students ranging from kindergarten to grade 3.  
              On the Friday before election day an administrative assistant at the school, not involved in the polling of votes, took a call from an individual asking if masks were required to vote.  He called twice.  The second call was on voting day.  On each occasion he was referred to Elections Canada, not the school.  Another call was received on election day around noon asking the same question, this time answered by the principal.  She said there was signage, arrows and posters on the premises about masks.  She asked an elections officer who confirmed masks were required and relayed this information to the caller.  The caller argued with her and said there would be trouble if he had to wear a mask.  He called her a fucking cunt.  The presumption is that all three calls were made by the accused.
              The principal had taken a number of grade one students outside in the courtyard where the entrance to the gym and voting centre was set up shortly after noon.  She took them inside when she heard angry voices and shouting in the courtyard.  She came back outside and saw the police were there.  She arranged a soft lockdown because she was concerned there was a danger and kept everyone inside.
              The complainant was working as an Information Officer at the polling station.  He was standing outside the entrance door to the gym beside a table.  His responsibility was to provide information to voters, making sure they had their voters’ cards or identification and to make sure they were wearing masks.
              Around noon he noticed a man, the accused, coming towards him and the voting door to the gym without a mask.  It was his job to inform him to wear a mask.  He walked very fast and the complainant stood in front of him and greeted him and asked him to put a mask on before he went in.  The accused did not slow down or make eye contact but when he got close to the complainant he punched him in the head on his right side.  The complainant’s glasses flew off.  The accused walked by him and said he had the right to vote without a mask on and walked in the door.  The complainant suffered pain where he was punched in the head.  It persisted and he went to emergency at the hospital that day and the next day.  His glasses were broken beyond repair.
              At the hospital it was determined he had a fractured nose and a concussion.  As the concussion symptoms subsided, he began having vision problems and had to have vision therapy.  He continued to have pain on the side of his head.  He had to have plastic surgery on his nose as it was dislocated.  His vision problems caused him to lose his job because he could not spend time in front of a computer that he needed to for functioning in his job.  It caused massive headaches.  He is now taking training for a different career not involving computers.  He still suffers from the fracture, the concussion and his vision. 
              The accused gave evidence that he indeed made the calls but could not remember how many.  He did walk toward the door to the polling station where there was a table just outside the door with masks and sanitizers.  He states the complainant abruptly came up behind him, got in front of him, put both hands on his stomach so the accused slapped him on the right side of his head.  The complainant walked inside and the accused followed him, twice telling him he had absolutely no right to put his hands on him and not to ever do it again.  He said the complainant never said anything to him at any time.  The accused admits he was angry and he is an anti-masker.
The Law of Credibility
              Clearly there are two versions before me on a number of issues going to credibility.  When credibility is an issue it raises the Supreme Court of Canada case of R v WD, 15 SCR 742 (WD) and authorities following.
 
 
 
          In a case where the accused testifies and the issue is credibility, the rule of reasonable doubt applies to that issue.  There are two situations where the court must acquit the accused.  First, if the trier of fact believes the accused.  Second, even if they do not believe the accused but his evidence raises a reasonable doubt as to his guilt when considered in the context of the evidence as a whole.
          The concept of reasonable doubt was explained by the Supreme Court in R v Lifchus, 1997 CanLII 319 (SCC), 3 SCR 320 (Lifchus).  The standard of proof beyond a reasonable doubt is intertwined with the presumption of innocence.  It is based on reason and common sense.  It is logically connected to evidence or absence of evidence.  It does not involve proof to an absolute certainty.  It is not proof beyond any doubt, nor is it an imaginary or frivolous doubt.  On the other hand, more is required than proof that the accused is probably guilty.  If the conclusion is only that the accused is probably guilty, he must be acquitted.
          In 2019, the Alberta Court of Appeal handed down the case of R v Ryon, 2019 ABCA 36, (Ryon) where they reiterated not only that the accused evidence must be considered in the context of the evidence as a whole but that R v WD does not stand for the proposition that the 
accused’s evidence must be considered first.  They adopted the approach proposed by Doherty J.A. in R v Carriere (2001), 2001 CanLII 8609 (ON CA), 151 OAC 115 (Ont. C.A.).
          They then referred to the Supreme Court case R v Dinardo, 2008 SCC 24 (Dinardo) as support for considering the accused’s evidence in the context of the evidence as a whole.
          It is only exculpatory evidence the instruction of W.D. applies to.
          In R v Achuil, 2019 ABCA 299,  the Court of Appeal clarified its wording in Ryon regarding the second prong of WD.
          In assessing credibility there is no magic formula provided to triers of fact.  Instead, there are a number of questions to be considered, for example, whether the witness seems to have a good memory of the relevant events, whether the evidence provided by a witness seems reasonable and consistent and whether there is any reason why a witness would not be telling the
truth.  When assessing the evidence of the accused, it is impermissible to assume that the accused will lie to escape conviction, to do so would undermine the presumption of innocence, R v Laboucan, [2010] 1 SCR 379, at paras 14-18.
          In addition there are several authorities dealing with a bare denial by the accused or a different version by an accused.
          In R v Page, 2017 ABQB 33, Justice Renke, under the heading “Rejection of the Accused’s Account”, states that an accused’s account need not raise a reasonable doubt, even if that account was plausible and unshaken in cross-examination.  He states a trier of fact may reject an accused’s plausible account wholly, because the trier of fact accepts the counter-account of the Crown’s evidence beyond a reasonable doubt.  That is if the trier is convinced beyond a reasonable doubt by the Crown’s evidence and no reasonable doubt arises from the evidence that the trier accepts.  He refers to R v Vuradin, 2013 SCC 38 (Vuradin) as well as R v Gordon, 2015 ABCA 341; and R v (S(T), 2012 ONCA 289 by Watt J.A.
          In Vuradin the Supreme Court stated the trial judge found the complainant’s evidence compelling and accepted her evidence where it conflicted with the evidence of the accused.  They then stated at para. 19:
...No further explanation for rejecting the appellant’s evidence was required.
          In R v CLS, 2021 ABCA 147 the court stated the trial judge did not reject the accused’s evidence because it was a bare denial.  He disbelieved his evidence because it conflicted with the balance of the Crown’s evidence, including the complainant’s.  It did not raise a reasonable doubt because it was inconsistent with the complainant’s evidence which he accepted as credible.  He does not need to find fault with the accused’s evidence in order to convict.
          In R v TS, 2012 ONCA 289 (Ont. CA), Justice Watt stated at paragraph 79 as follows:
As a matter of law, reasoned acceptance of a complainant’s evidence is a basis upon which a trial judge can reject the evidence of an accused and find guilt proven beyond a reasonable doubt.  A reasoned and considered acceptance of the complainant’s evidence is as much an explanation for rejecting the contrary evidence of an accused as are problems inherent in an accused’s own testimony:
Analysis
          I choose to analyze the evidence of the complainant first.  I found him to be mild mannered, respectful and anything but aggressive.  He had a good memory and only testified to what he knew and could remember.  He saw the accused approaching from some distance and at a fast and determined pace.  He did not slow down as he approached him.  He was not wearing a mask and it was his function to intercept him and advise him he needed to wear a mask to enter the polling station.  He recalls getting in front of him for that purpose.  The next thing he knew he was hit on the side of the head.  He was unsure whether it was the accused’s closed fist or an open hand.  From the strength and power of the blow he assumed it had to be a closed fist.  He could have just said it was a closed fist but he did not because he did not see it coming.  It came out of nowhere.  This tells me he only testified to what he saw and knew and did not embellish anything.  These are factors in determining his credibility.
          In cross-examination, the accused’s version was put to him that he came up behind the accused, ran around in front of him and placed his hands on his stomach area and pushed him.  This was put to him on a number of occasions and on each occasion he denied that happened.  He was standing by the table when the accused approached.  Finally, after several denials he said, “I was always in front of him.  I was never on the side.  I was never from behind.  I never touched him.  We never had a conversation either.”  This strikes me as very credible and reliable evidence.  It was factual and without equivocation.
          It was then put to him that he was slapped, not punched.  He again was adamant that he was punched.  He based that on the pain he endured and the resulting injuries he suffered.
          The complainant was able to describe in detail the injuries he suffered and the continuing pain he suffers to this day which resulted in him losing his job all because of the actions of the accused.
 
 
 
          I found the complainant to be highly credible and honest and I accept his evidence and his version of the incident entirely.
          I turn now to the version of the accused.  First of all he admits he made the phone calls but he does not remember how many times he called.  I accept the evidence of the school personnel that there were three calls and they came from the same person.  I also accept that on election day he told them that if he had to wear a mask there would be trouble.  His use of foul language give me the impression he approached the polling station with an attitude.  He did not deny that he walked quickly toward the polling station entrance toward the table.
          His version that the complainant came up from behind him defies all logic and credulity.  The complainant’s station was by the table outside the door where the accused was approaching.  How could he possibly be behind the fast approaching accused?  How could the accused even see him if he was behind him?  His version is the complainant somehow came around in front of him from behind and immediately placed his hands on the front of the accused and pushed him.  The accused immediately slapped him on the side of the head.
          I agree with the complainant this was no slap.  A slap could not have caused the extensive damage the complainant suffered.  It had to be a punch with some considerable force behind it.  I find the accused’s version that he slapped him to be not credible.
          I also take into account the difference in size of the two men.  The accused is a large man whereas the complainant is slight in stature and much smaller.  He was at a distinct disadvantage and never saw the blow coming by either version.
          I find the accused’s version is not credible nor reliable and is invented to justify his actions.
          The defence raises self-defence but any such defence or justifications for assaulting the complainant is based on my accepting the accused’s version which I do not.  Even if I did, the actions of the accused are so excessive compared to what he complains the complainant did, there would be no such defence available.
Conclusion
          I accept the evidence of the complainant as credible and truthful as to what happened.  I reject the version of the accused as made up and untruthful.  I find him guilty of assault causing bodily harm.
 
 
 
          I do not find evidence supporting count two of mischief, nor have I heard any submissions of it by either counsel.  If the Crown is submitting that count has been proven, I will hear further submissions.
