./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/pc/2023abpc3.html
              Laron Damo Wall (Wall) pled guilty to one count of luring contrary to s 172.1(1)(a) Criminal Code of Canada (CC) with a date range of between April 1, and May 23, 2022.
              The matter was adjourned for preparation of a Pre-Sentence Report (PSR). 
              The facts relied on for this plea are as follows:
a)      JS is the complainant. AJ is JS’s sister. AJ had been dating Wall since early 2022. JS met Wall through her sister AJ. 
b)      In addition to face-to-face communications, Wall and JS began to communicate using online social media platforms such as Snapchat and Instagram.
c)      On April 1, 2022 Wall sent a Snapchat message to JS asking her what she was doing. She responded that she had just finished showering. Wall asked her to send him a picture.  
d)      JS believed Wall wanted a nude photo but sent a photo of her face.
e)      On one occasion Wall sent a shirtless image of himself wearing a towel around his waist and asked JS to send him a picture “like this”.
f)       JS told Wall she did not want to send pictures like that.
g)      During the months of April and May, Wall made requests for nude images.  Eventually JS relented and sent two images of her exposed breasts via Snapchat.  JS observed the Snapchat application display a notification that Wall had saved a copy of those images.
h)      JS never sent any additional pictures.
i)       Wall also sent messages of a sexual nature, encouraging JS to meet up with him for sexual contact. These communications continued until May 24, 2022.
j)       On May 25, 2022, prior to any criminal investigation, Wall attended West Division detachment of the Edmonton Police Service (EPS).  He sought advice from the police and requested assistance in deleting the photographs. 
 
II.                The Accused’s Personal Antecedents
              Wall was 22 years old at the time of the index offence, he is now 23.  He appears before the Court with no prior criminal record and has complied with all conditions of his current release order.
              Wall’s biological father was absent from his life.  At two years old, Wall’s biological mother sent Wall and his sister to Barbados to live with extended family.  During his four years in Barbados, Wall and his sister were physically and sexually abused.  
              Upon returning to Canada at the age of six, Wall went to live with Mr. and Mrs. Wall, a foster family, who eventually adopted Wall. Wall considers Mr. and Mrs. Wall to be his mother and father.  Between the ages of six and 12 Wall remembers little, aside from going back and forth between his biological mother and adoptive family and that he was homeschooled by Mrs. Wall during those years. 
              Wall recalls some fond memories of his childhood, but also some negative ones.  Wall described his family as being a “very” religious family, and his brother, Michael confirmed that they were raised in a “strict” home.  
 
              As stated on page three of the PSR:  
When the subject was 15 years old, he stated he shared his first kiss with a female from his school.  As a result of this, he advised Mrs. Wall made him return to home schooling.  The subject explained the Wall family followed religious beliefs that forbid any sexual activity with the opposite sex until the age of 18.  Further consequences imposed included him being “pulled” from his youth group and extracurricular activities.  [Wall] stated this continued until the age of 17, when he was allowed to resume attending in-person classes.  The subject stated soon after his return to school, he shared another kiss with a female classmate, and was made to return to home schooling again. The subject described this period of his life as becoming increasingly tumultuous, he expressed his belief that the relationship he had with Mrs. Wall was “toxic”, and he acknowledged he was struggling with anger; which he felt to be a result of him not processing previous abuse.  The subject stated due to this, he was sent to Haulsville, Texas to attend a Christian based therapeutic program called Heartlight Boarding School.  The subject stated that he was under the impression he was only to stay there for six months, but he ended up staying there until the age of 19.  The subject reported he completed the program and felt like his life was in a better place.
              Wall graduated Grade 12 from Heartlight Boarding School in Texas.  Throughout elementary and high school Wall was both home-schooled and attended Christian Academy Schools.  Wall explained that he excelled academically as he was made to achieve high grades, or he would face consequences such as not being allowed to play sports.  Wall denied ever being reprimanded in school.  With respect to future educational goals Wall would like to attend university for a business program.  The PSR author confirmed this information through several collateral contacts. 
          Upon returning to Canada, Wall met his former girlfriend, Danea Hauser; after six months of dating, she became pregnant.  At the age of 22, he and Ms. Hauser had a son.  He advised that the two mutually decided to end their relationship shortly after their son’s birth although for a time they continued residing together and co-parenting.  Currently, Wall rents a room in Edmonton, has an amicable relationship with Ms. Hauser (as evidenced by her letter of support entered as Exhibit S3), and remains a part of his son’s life.  This information was confirmed by Ms. Hauser.  
          Since graduating high school Wall has primarily worked construction jobs.  He was employed as a heavy equipment operator but was recently laid off.  He is currently receiving Employment Insurance and is waiting for the outcome of his court matters before returning to work.  
          Wall advised the author of the PSR that while attending Heartlight Boarding School he was diagnosed with Oppositional Defiant Disorder (ODD) and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), although the author of the PSR could not confirm this information. 
          Wall confirmed that he has never used alcohol, has tried cannabis approximately five times but has never developed an addiction to it, has never experimented with any other substances, and is “totally against” substance use.  This information was corroborated through Wall’s brother Michael, and Wall’s former partner, Ms. Hauser. 
 
III.             Positions of the Parties
          The Crown proceeded by indictment.  The maximum sentence is 14 years’ jail.  The mandatory minimum was struck down as unconstitutional in the cases of: R v Melrose 2021 ABQB 73 (Melrose) and R v Jissink 2021 ABQB 102 (Jissink).  
          The Crown is seeking a period of incarceration of between 18 and 24 months, followed by 24 months’ probation.
          Defence is seeking a Conditional Sentence Order (CSO) of two years followed by 24 months’ probation.
 
IV.             Sentencing Principles
a.      Sentencing Objectives
          The CC says that the fundamental purpose of sentencing is to “...contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions that have one or more...” of the objectives set out in s 718 CC.  Those objectives are denunciation, deterrence, rehabilitation, reparation, to promote a sense of responsibility in the offender and acknowledgment of harm done, and to separate the offender, bearing in mind that s 718.2 (d) and (e) CC states that one should not be deprived of liberty, if less restrictive sanctions are appropriate.
          Section 718.01 CC also mandates that when a Court imposes a sentence for an offence that involved the abuse of a person under the age of 18, then the Court shall give primary consideration to denunciation and deterrence. 
          Although, generally speaking, no one sentencing objective trumps another, as stated by the Supreme Court of Canada (SCC) in R v Friesen 2020 SCC 9 (Friesen) at para 104: 
Where Parliament has indicated which sentencing objectives are to receive priority in certain cases, the sentencing judge’s discretion is thereby limited, such that it is no longer open to the judge to elevate other sentencing objectives to an equal or higher priority (Rayo, at paras. 103 and 107-8).  However, while s. 718.01 requires that deterrence and denunciation have priority, nonetheless, the sentencing judge retains discretion to accord significant weight to other factors (including rehabilitation and Gladue factors) in exercising discretion in arriving at a fit sentence, in accordance with the overall principles of proportionality. [See also:  R v Shrivastava 2019 ABQB 663 at para. 91 (Shrivastava); Melrose at paras 48-49].
          Denunciation has been defined as the “communication of society's condemnation of the offender's conduct.” (R v Proulx, 2000 SCC 5 (Proulx), at para 102). The Court in Proulx continued, stating:
In M. (C.A.), supra, at para. 81, I wrote:
In short, a sentence with a denunciatory element represents a symbolic, collective statement that the offender’s conduct should be punished for encroaching on our society’s basic code of values as enshrined within our substantive criminal law.  As Lord Justice Lawton stated in R. v. Sargeant (1974), 60 Cr. App. R. 74, at p. 77: “society, through the courts, must show its abhorrence of particular types of crime, and the only way in which the courts can show this is by the sentences they pass.” (Proulx, para. 102).
          Deterrence refers to both specific and general deterrence.  Specific deterrence looks at the need to deter the individual offender being sentenced; general deterrence is intended to send a message to the general public that such an offence will not go unpunished. 
          Given JS’s age, s 718.01 is triggered.  Denunciation and deterrence are paramount sentencing objectives when sentencing Wall.
b.      Proportionality
          Proportionality is the “cardinal principle” of sentencing:  R v Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64 (Lacasse) at para 12.
          Pursuant to s 718.1 CC, the sentence to be imposed must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.  The Court in Friesen specifically addressed the proportionality assessment as it relates to sexual offences against children.  At para 75 the Court stated:
...[C]ourts need to take into account the wrongfulness and harmfulness of sexual offences against children when applying the proportionality principle.  Accurately understanding both factors is key to imposing a proportionate sentence.  The wrongfulness and the harmfulness impact both the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.
          When considering gravity in the proportionality analysis, “courts must recognize and give effect to (1) the inherent wrongfulness of these offences; (2) the potential harm to children that flows from these offences; and (3) the actual harm that children suffer as a result of these offences.” (Friesen, at para 76).
          Justice Moldaver in R v Morrison 2019 SCC 15 (Morrison) at paras 39-40 commented: 
Parliament created [the ‘luring’] offence to combat the very real threat posed by adult predators who attempt to groom or lure children by electronic means. As this Court explained in Levigne, the offence seeks to protect children by “identify[ing] and apprehend[ing] predatory adults who, generally for illicit sexual purposes, troll the Internet to attract and entice vulnerable children and adolescents”: para. 24.
 
To achieve this purpose, s. 172.1 criminalizes conduct that precedes the commission, or even the attempted commission, of certain designated offences, most of which involve sexual exploitation of children. It thereby creates an essentially inchoate offence — that is, a preparatory crime that captures conduct intended to culminate in the commission of a completed offence: see Legare, at para. 25; R. v. Alicandro, 2009 ONCA 133, 95 O.R. (3d) 173, at para. 20, citing A. Ashworth, Principles of Criminal Law, (5th ed. 2006), at pp. 468-70. There is no requirement that the accused meet or even intend to meet with the other person with a view to committing any of the designated offences: see Legare, at para. 25. The offence reflects Parliament’s desire to “close the cyberspace door before the predator gets in to prey”: para. 25. 
          Friesen sent a strong message that sexual offences against children are violent crimes that wrongfully exploit children’s vulnerabilities and cause profound harm. The harm flowing from these offences is not limited to the victim upon whom the offence was committed.  These offences have a ripple effect, with the harm extending to the child’s parents, caregivers, and family members.  There is also the harm that results from the financial, personal, and emotional costs of helping the victim recover (Friesen, at paras 62-63).
          I find it important to mention that Friesen reiterated that a child under the age of 16 lacks the capacity to consent and any participation in such activity is not a mitigating factor and should never be equated to consent (at para 52). (See also:  Melrose at para 190). 
          In assessing moral blameworthiness, Renke, J. in R v Misay, 2021 ABQB 485 (Misay) emphasized at para 48, “that sexual offences against children are wrong in themselves, regardless of consequences threatened or actualized.”  As stated in Friesen at para 90: “[t]he fact that the victim is a child increases the offender’s degree of responsibility. ... the intentional sexual exploitation and objectification of children is highly morally blameworthy because children are so vulnerable.”
          While sentences for these crimes must increase to reflect both Parliament’s sentencing initiatives and society’s deepened understanding of the wrongfulness and harmfulness of sexual violence against children, the Court in Friesen also stated at para 91: 
These comments should not be taken as a direction to disregard relevant factors that may reduce the offender’s moral culpability. The proportionality principle requires that the punishment imposed be “just and appropriate . . ., and nothing more” (M. (C.A.), at para. 80 (emphasis deleted); see also Ipeelee, at para. 37). First, as sexual assault and sexual interference are broadly-defined offences that embrace a wide spectrum of conduct, the offender’s conduct will be less morally blameworthy in some cases than in others. Second, the personal circumstances of offenders can have a mitigating effect.
V.                Application of Principles to this Case
          In addressing proportionality, any sexual offence against a child is serious, and this offence is no exception.  This offence exploited JS’s vulnerabilities.  Although no Victim Impact Statements were filed, I nonetheless accept that the harm that flows from this offence does not end with JS but extends to her family, and her relationships with others. Further, although Wall entered a guilty plea to one offence of luring contrary to s 172.1 CC, this was not a spontaneous one-time incident; despite being rebuffed by JS, Wall continued to communicate with JS.  He repeatedly asked her to provide him with nude photographs of herself, until she succumbed to his duress.  He also repeatedly communicated with JS to meet up with him for sexual contact.  His contact with JS continued from April 1, 2022 until May 24, 2022.
          Although there was no physical contact between JS and Wall, which would have been considered an aggravating factor had it occurred, child luring is an inchoate offence. Parliament’s intent was to criminalize telecommunications with a child when the intent of the communications was to pervert the child’s mind and entice the child to engage in what would otherwise be a specified secondary offence.
          However, the facts of this case can be distinguished from those referenced in Morrison.  In Morrison the Court cited R v Levigne, 2010 SCC 25 (Levigne) suggesting that this offence seeks to protect children by “identify[ing] and apprehend[ing] predatory adults who, generally for illicit sexual purposes, troll the Internet to attract and entice vulnerable children and adolescents.” (Morrison at para 40 citing Levigne at para 24).
          Prior to engaging in any online communications, Wall and JS knew each other.  This was not a situation where Wall was trolling the Internet attempting to engage with random, vulnerable children and adolescents for illicit sexual purposes.  While this does not diminish the seriousness of the offence and the profound harm flowing from it, it nevertheless provides context.
          Mental health issues can be considered as mitigating in assessing an offender’s moral culpability: R v Deren, 2021 ABPC 84 at paras 36-41(Deren); R v Belcourt, 2010 ABCA 319 at para 8 (Belcourt); Melrose at para 23.
          Wall advised the author of the PSR that while attending Heartlight Boarding School he was diagnosed with ODD and ADHD. This was not confirmed by the PSR author, nor was any psychological assessment tendered during sentencing.  
          Without a psychological assessment or confirmation of a formal diagnosis, it is difficult to determine what, if any, weight should be given to any undiagnosed mental health considerations. 
          However, even without a psychological assessment or mental health diagnosis, a traumatic and painful childhood involving physical, emotional, and sexual abuse are appropriate factors to consider in mitigation:  Shrivastava, paras 83-84.
          As a child, Wall disclosed to his adoptive parents the sexual abuse he had endured while living in Barbados.  To deal with his trauma, Wall attended counselling consistently throughout his childhood; he advised that he attended counselling weekly until he was 19, and now attends occasionally as needed. 
          Though Wall is not Indigenous, he presents with many of the same considerations that are commonly referred to as Gladue factors (R v Gladue, 1999 CanLII 679 (SCC), 1 SCR 688), and the same considerations that the Court in Shrivastava deemed relevant mitigating factors: he experienced a traumatic childhood that was marked by family dysfunction, he was separated from his family at a young age, and he was the victim of both physical and sexual abuse. I have no difficulty in accepting that these factors lessen Wall’s moral culpability to some degree.
          To summarize, s 718.01 CC requires that denunciation and deterrence are the primary sentencing objectives. However, as stated in Friesen at para 104, the sentencing judge retains discretion to accord significant weight to other relevant factors when arriving at a proportionate sentence.
          Child luring is a serious crime that wrongfully exploits children’s vulnerabilities and causes profound harm to not only the child, but the child’s family and communities. Despite that all child luring is serious, I must also contextualize the circumstances of the offence, noting that it differs from the target offenders mentioned in Morrison. 
          Aggravating factors that were assessed within the proportionality analysis included the fact that this was not a spontaneous, one-time communication but lasted over several weeks, and Wall eventually succeeded in obtaining nude photos of JS.
          Factors considered in reducing Wall’s moral culpability were his unstable and traumatic childhood and abuse that he suffered.
          Considering all these factors, I find the offence was serious, but not to the same degree of seriousness as referenced in Morrison.  Regarding moral culpability, given Wall’s personal antecedents I find it falls somewhere between the mid and high range on the moral blameworthiness scale. 
          Aside from those aggravating factors that I have considered in the proportionality analysis, I have not identified any further aggravating factors.  
          As for mitigating factors not contemplated in the proportionality analysis, I find the circumstances of this case exceptional.  Wall attended the police station seeking their advice prior to any investigation or report made against him.  He advised police he had inappropriate online communications, and inappropriate photographs of the victim.  He asked the police to delete the photographs. From submissions made by counsel I was left to believe that Wall’s involvement with the police was not a pre-emptive maneuver in anticipation of a complaint from the victim.  But for Wall’s self-disclosure, this matter would not be before the Court.  As such, I find Wall’s actions to be a clear indication of remorse and accepting responsibility.  
          Wall was cooperative throughout the police investigation, he entered a guilty plea at the earliest opportunity, he is a youthful offender with no prior criminal record, he has complied with all release conditions, and he has a supportive family.  
 
VI.             Parity 
a.      Starting Point Sentences
          As conceded in the Crown’s sentencing materials, Friesen has declined to establish a national starting point for any child exploitation offence (para 106).  Nevertheless, Friesen made it clear that sentences for sexual offences against children must increase. (Friesen at para 101).
          Friesen also reminded us at para 37 that:
...[S]entencing ranges and starting points are guidelines, not hard and fast rules (R v M (T.E.), 1997 CanLII 389 (SCC), [1997] 1 S.C.R. 948 (S.C.C.), at para. 33; R v Wells, 2000 SCC 10, [2000] 1 S.C.R. 207 (S.C.C.), at para. 45; R v Nasogaluak, 2010 SCC 6, [2010] 1 S.C.R. 206 (S.C.C.), at para. 44; Lacasse, at para. 60).  ... Ranges of sentences and starting points cannot be binding in either theory or practice, and appellate courts cannot interpret or apply the standard of review to enforce them, ...” [Emphasis added].
          Counsel provided several cases in their sentencing materials.  Some of the cases included were for the purpose of highlighting sentencing principles, and several of these cases have already been referred to in this judgment.  Other cases provided were for comparative purposes.  While cases provided for parity may provide some assistance in determining a fit range, it is trite to say that no two cases are identical, and a sentencing range does not create a minimum starting point nor a maximum sentence – it is simply a range to assist in determining a fit and proportionate sentence. 
 
b.      Case Law – Sentencing Principles
          The following are cases referred to by counsel in their written materials, in support of the following sentencing principles:
a.       Sentences for sexual violence against children need to increase: Friesen, at paras 5, 101, 109); R v Lemay 2020 ABCA 365 (Lemay) at paras 43-51.
b.      Sexual offences against children, including luring, are serious offences that favor incarceration absent exceptional circumstances:  Jissink at para 71; Misay, at para 52.
c.       Courts should be cautious about relying on dated precedents that fail to reflect society’s current awareness of the impact of sexual abuse on children, and past precedents must not be seen as imposing a cap on sentences. (Friesen, at para 110).
 
c.       Case Law – Parity Principle
          Below is a summary of the cases provided for comparative purposes.
          Relevant Alberta cases that post-date Friesen:
a.          Lemay
Facts: 
•         35-year-old accused (AC) started texting with a 15-year-old girl complainant (CO) and sent her pictures of his genitals. He pressured her to do the same, which she did. He sent her videos of himself masturbating while viewing her intimate images. 
•         They met five times for sexual activity over a four-month period. 
•         AC pled guilty to sexual interference and luring. 
            Sentence Imposed: 
•         The 42 months jail plus two years’ probation was overturned by Court of Appeal.  They substituted a sentence of 5.5 years (four years for sexual interference and 18 months consecutive for luring). 
 
b.         Misay 
Facts: 
•         38-year-old AC engaged in sexually explicit communications over text messages with undercover officer posing as 15-year-old girl. He sent her a photo of his genitals. He discussed the sexual activity he planned to engage in when he met the girl. They made plans to meet at a hotel for sexual activity. He was arrested at the hotel. 
•         AC had previously been warned by police not to engage in sexual contact with minors. 
•         AC pled guilty to luring contrary to s 172.1(1)(b). 
 Sentence Imposed: 
•         15 months jail plus two years’ probation. 
 
 
 
 
c.          R v Boucher,  2020 ABCA 208(Boucher)
Facts: 
•         The Crown appealed an eight-year global sentence imposed on the respondent (AC) following his guilty pleas to sexual interference with a person under the age of 16 (six years’ incarceration), making child pornography (one year consecutive) and luring a child under the age of 16 (one year consecutive). 
•          The AC committed more than 90 major sexual assaults on a 14-year-old child who viewed him as a father figure, over a period of approximately seven months. His abuse included luring the complainant via text messages to facilitate interfering with her in a sexual manner and creating pornographic images and videos of their sexual activities. The AC pled guilty to all of the charges against him on the first day of trial. 
Sentence Imposed:  
•         The eight-year global sentence was upheld on appeal.  
 
d.         R v EF,  2021 ABQB 639(EF)
 Facts:  
•         AC is CO’s father.  The AC was 48 and the CO was 14 at the time of the offence. AC pinned CO’s hands above her head as she was lying on her back on a couch in AC’s living room. AC lifted up CO’s shirt with his free hand.  CO was not wearing a bra. AC touched CO’s breasts and squeezed her nipples. The touching took about a minute. The touching was for a sexual purpose. AC was charged and convicted of one count of s 151 CC. 
Sentence Imposed: 
•         24 months’ imprisonment less four months’ credit for a total sentence of 20 months’ imprisonment for the sexual interference with CO. 
 
e.          R v DCH,  2020 ABQB 510(DCH)
 Facts: 
•         AC entered guilty pleas to the following charges: invitation to sexual touching contrary to s 152 CC, making child pornography contrary to s.163.1(2) CC, and accessing child pornography contrary to s.163.1(4.1) CC. 
•         AC showed pornographic videos to his four-year-old piano student, the CO. The Internet browsing history and metadata recovered from the phone showed that AC had used the phone to browse the Internet for child pornography videos, images, and stories.  AC had accessed approximately 1,356 images and videos of child pornography and he had downloaded some child pornography into hidden folders. 
•         A risk assessment had been prepared and the psychiatrist assessed the AC’s risk for further accessing of child pornography to be moderate to high and his risk for relapse into non-contact and contact sexual offences to be moderate.
 Sentence Imposed: 
•         The global sentence imposed was 4.5 years’ incarceration – s 152 CC (two years), s 163.1(2) CC (one year consecutive) and s 163.1(4.1) CC (1.5 years consecutive).
 
f.        Deren
Facts: 
•         AC pled guilty to s 172.1(1)(b) for messages exchanged with his 13-year-old niece, particularly a text exchange where the AC was telling the CO that her mother thought the two of them should engage in intercourse so the CO could try it.  The CO showed the text messages to her mother and the police investigation followed.  AC brought a s 12 challenge to the six-month mandatory minimum sentence (MMS). 
•         AC had severe cognitive deficits, was supported by Assured Income for the Severely Handicapped (AISH), maintained independent living with extensive supports, and had no prior record.  Expert opinion accepted by the Court found AC to be to be a very low risk to reoffend. 
Sentenced Imposed:
•         Six-month CSO plus two years’ probation. 
 
g.      Jissink
Facts: 
•         43-year-old male AC (high school teacher) pled guilty to luring under 
s 172.1(1)(a).  The CO (16 years old) was student at the AC’s high school, although not in his classroom. AC sent two messages to the CO via Snapchat. Both messages contained an image of AC with captions that said “You’re hot” and “LOL, I wanna fuck you”. No physical contact occurred. 
•         Aggravating factors included: statutory aggravating factor of a breach of trust, age difference, the likelihood of risk of harm to complainant, and the AC’s behaviour communicating inappropriately via Snapchat with three other students. 
•         Mitigating factors included: AC’s guilty plea, AC’s remorse (evidenced by guilty plea and psychological assessment which commented on AC’s increasing awareness of his inappropriate and criminal conduct) and had support from family, employer and community. 
Sentence Imposed: 
•         One year incarceration followed by two years of probation. 
  
h.      Melrose
Facts: 
•         27-year-old AC pled guilty to sexual interference pursuant to s 151 of the CC and child luring pursuant to s 172.1(1)(b). The AC and the 13-year-old CO had sexual intercourse once. The AC suffered from a significant cognitive impairment which resulted in his mental age falling between 8.5 to 11 years old. The Court found, while the CO did not have the capacity to consent due to her age, this was a “relationship of genuine affection”. 
•         AC had no criminal record, cooperated with authorities (confessed to police and entered early guilty plea), displayed remorseful conduct by attending counselling and accepting Guardianship and Trusteeship and had strong family and community support. 
•         Defence challenged mandatory minimum under s 172.1(2)(a) which prescribed a minimum sentence of one year imprisonment for an offence under s 172.1(1)(b). 
Sentencing Principles: 
•         Psycho-social factors may affect an offender’s moral culpability. Exposure to anti-social behaviour over an extended period may make it easier for an offender to make bad decisions (at para 22). Cognitive difficulties falling short of Not Criminally Responsible (NCR) finding may also dispose an offender to make poor choices making them, to that extent, less blameworthy (at para 23). 
•         “De facto” consent cannot be a mitigating factor (at para 190). Limited frequency and duration of offences only points to a lack of aggravating factors (at paras 195-197). Reference to neutral factors may assist in distinguishing the offender from the circumstances of other offenders who have committed similar offences (at para 201).  
•         Court held s 172.1(1)(b) mandatory minimum violated s 12 of the Charter and is therefore of no force or effect (at para 389). 
Sentence Imposed: 
•         On the s 172.1(1)(b) offence the judge sentenced the accused to probation for three years. Ancillary orders imposed were a DNA order under s 487.051(1), a SOIRA order under s 490.012, and a Prohibition Order under s 161 prohibiting the accused from employment or volunteering with persons under the age of 16 and from having any contact with persons under the age of 16. 
 
          Alberta cases that pre-date Friesen:
a.          R v ER,  2019 ABPC 292(ER)
Facts: 
•         AC was 56, the CO was 15 years old.  The AC’s and CO’s families had become friends through their church community.  Text messages, email and telephone calls were exchanged between AC and CO over a five-week period, usually late at night.  Messages include sexualized grooming type texts, and in one phone call the AC asked the CO to touch herself.  There were no in-person conversations or contact. 
•         AC entered early guilty plea, had no record and good employment history.  The PSR was favourable, and the FACS Assessment report opined he was a low risk to reoffend.  AC brought a s 12 challenge to the one-year MMS.
Sentence Imposed: 
•         Four months’ incarceration plus 18 months’ probation.
 
          Cases that pre-date Friesen and/or are from out-of-jurisdiction:
a.          R v Woodward,  2011 ONCA 610(Woodward)
Facts: 
•         30-year-old AC met 12-year-old CO in an online chat room and progressed to texting with her. They exchanged hundreds of text messages during which he explained to her the sex acts he wanted her to perform. He offered her millions of dollars to have sex with him. As her family had serious financial problems, she agreed to meet him after he raised the amount he offered her. He took steps to convince her that he had the means to pay and employed a ruse in which someone pretended to be a bank employee confirming that the accused had millions.  He later pretended to transfer millions of dollars into an account in her name.  
•         When they met, he put the CO’s hand on his penis, had her perform fellatio on him, and had vaginal intercourse with her. 
•         AC was convicted of sexual assault, sexual interference, invitation to sexual touching, attempting to obtain for consideration the sexual services of a person under the age of 18, and child luring. 
Sentence Imposed: 
•         The 6.5-year global sentence was upheld on appeal (five years for sexual assault, four years concurrent for sexual interference, two years concurrent for invitation to sexual touching, 12 months concurrent for attempting to obtain sexual services for consideration, and 18 months consecutive for child luring). 
 
 
b.         R v Moolla, 2021 ONSC 3702 (Moola) (conviction appeal dismissed 2022 ONCA 433) 
            Facts: 
•         35-year-old AC put an ad on Craigslist seeking sexual relationship with a young female. An undercover police officer, posing as a 14-year-old girl, responded. A lengthy text message conversation ensued over two days, with the clear purpose being for the AC and the girl to engage in sex. The AC sent the girl a photo of his genitals. Police arrested the AC on his way to meet the girl. 
•         AC was on probation at the time for criminal harassment and had a prior unrelated record with four entries. 
•         AC was convicted of luring, making sexually explicit material available to a child (stayed due to R v Kienapple, 1974 CanLII 14 (SCC), [1975] 1 SCR 729 [Kienapple]), and breach of probation. 
Sentence Imposed: 
•         The Court followed the ONCA in Woodward and imposed 3.5 years jail for luring and six months concurrent for the breach of probation.
 
 
 
c.       R v TJ 2021 ONCA 392 (TJ)
Facts: 
•         The AC’s age was not mentioned. All that is divulged is that he was the father of at least two sons. The CO, who was six or seven years old at the time, and her brother, were having a sleepover with AC’s sons. AC forced CO to rub his penis and invited her to perform fellatio, but she refused and left the room. 
•         AC was convicted of sexual assault, sexual interference (stayed due to Kienapple), and invitation to sexual touching (stayed due to Kienapple). 
•         Sentencing judge found AC was in a position of trust over CO. 
Sentence Imposed: 
•         Nine months jail plus two years’ probation overturned by Court of Appeal. 24 months’ jail substituted (but the Court of Appeal decided not to reincarcerate AC). 
 
d.      R v Folino (2005), 202 CCC (3d) 353,  2005 CanLII 40543 (ONCA)(Folino)
Facts: 
•         35-year-old AC entered a guilty plea to luring.  He sent emails and had live chats with a girl he believed to be 13 years old over a two-week period.  The messages had sexual content, and the AC arranged to meet with the child and was arrested at the meeting spot.
•         AC had no record, was married with children and good employment record.  Psychiatric assessments opined that the offence occurred during a major depressive episode and he was a low risk to reoffend. This is a sentence appeal of a nine-month plus3 years’ probation sentence and lifetime s 161 order, with the AC arguing for a CSO. 
 Sentence Imposed: 
•         18-month CSO plus three years’ probation. 
 
          Several of the offenders in the above-mentioned cases, fell into the Morrison prototype offender – an individual who trolled the internet to lure unsuspecting children (Lemay, Misay, Woodward, Moola, and Folino).  Several others involved the aggravating factor of a breach of trust, or the accused had a familial connection with the complainant (Boucher, EF, DCH, Deren, Jissink, and TJ).
          The only cases provided that did not fall into either of these categories were Melrose and ER.  The distinguishing feature between ER and Wall is the age disparity.  In ER the offender was a mature 56-year-old individual; Wall is a youthful offender at age 22. ER was sentenced to four months’ incarceration followed by 18 months’ probation. 
          In Melrose the Court struck down the s 172.1(1)(b) CC mandatory minimum sentence as unconstitutional and imposed a suspended sentence and three years’ probation.  Melrose can be distinguished on its facts given the significant cognitive deficits that the offender suffered with. 
 
VII.          Fit and Appropriate Sentence
          It is precisely because no two cases are identical, that sentencing is an individualized process. 
          A significant distinction from all the cases provided, is Wall’s acknowledgment of his wrongdoing by attending the police station requesting assistance prior to any criminal investigation or complaint being filed. Did Wall’s strict religious upbringing influence his decision to confess? Although I was not provided a reason for Wall’s confession, it was clearly communicated that there was no pending investigation or report filed, nor any suggestion of a threat of same.  This was not a pre-emptive strike.  As such, I will give Wall the benefit of the doubt and accept that his moral compass recalibrated and guided him in the right direction. 
          I also note that no Victim Impact Statement was filed by the complainant, despite the Crown advising her of her opportunity to do so.  There was a letter of support filed by the complainant’s sister AJ. I understand that this was to be accepted as her position and not necessarily the wishes of the family. 
          In November 2022, post-Friesen, Bill C-5 received Royal Assent. Bill C-5 revoked several of the sentencing provisions which previously prohibited the granting of a Conditional Sentence Order (CSO).  Prior to this amendment a CSO was prohibited for an offence where the Crown proceeded by indictment and the maximum penalty was 14 years imprisonment.  As a result of the legislative changes, s 742.1 now reads:
If a person is convicted of an offence and the court imposes a sentence of imprisonment of less than two years, the court may, for the purpose of supervising the offender's behaviour in the community, order that the offender serve the sentence in the community, subject to the conditions imposed under section 742.3, if
(a) the court is satisfied that the service of the sentence in the community would not endanger the safety of the community and would be consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing set out in sections 718 to 718.2;
(b) the offence is not an offence punishable by a minimum term of imprisonment;
(c) the offence is not an offence under any of the following provisions:
(i) section 239, for which a sentence is imposed under paragraph 239(1)(b) (attempt to commit murder),
(ii) section 269.1 (torture), or
(iii) section 318 (advocating genocide); and
(d) the offence is not a terrorism offence, or a criminal organization offence, prosecuted by way of indictment, for which the maximum term of imprisonment is 10 years or more.
          Had Parliament intended to prohibit any sexual offence against a child from receiving a CSO, they could have included that exception in the legislation.  
          It is not challenged that society’s concern over the prevalence of sexual violence against children is real, and the protection of children in our society is paramount.  
          There is no question that sexual offences against a child are serious offences that favor incarceration absent exceptional circumstances.  However, to say that every offender that commits a sexual offence against a child must be imprisoned, is failing to consider the overarching sentencing principle of proportionality.  
          While it has been conceded that there is no starting point for child luring, I think it beneficial to refer to comments made by the Supreme Court in Proulx.  Proulx made it clear that a starting point sentence had no place when considering a conditional sentence.  The Court stated at para 88:
The minimal benefits of uniformity in these circumstances are exceeded by the costs of the associated loss of individualization in sentencing.  By creating offence-specific starting points, there is a risk that these starting points will evolve into de facto minimum sentences of imprisonment.  This would thwart Parliament’s intention of not excluding particular categories of offence from the conditional sentencing regime.  It could also result in the imposition of disproportionate sentences in some cases.
          Proulx, further stated at para 102 (quoting from para 81 of R v M(CA), 1996 CanLII 230 (SCC), 1 SCR 500): 
Incarceration will usually provide more denunciation than a conditional sentence, as a conditional sentence is generally a more lenient sentence than a jail term of equivalent duration.  That said, a conditional sentence can still provide a significant amount of denunciation.  This is particularly so when onerous conditions are imposed and the duration of the conditional sentence is extended beyond the duration of the jail sentence that would ordinarily have been imposed in the circumstances. 
          Denunciation and deterrence are the paramount sentencing principles when sentencing an offender for a sexual offence against a child; however, as stated in Proulx a properly crafted conditional sentence order can provide a significant amount of denunciation.  As for deterrence, and given the circumstances of this case, I do not find that specific deterrence is an overwhelming concern.  Wall is a youthful offender with no prior criminal record and has abided by release conditions, he voluntarily turned himself in without any prior investigation or complaint having been initiated, and he is not the prototype target offender referred to in Morrison. As for general deterrence, I make this comment: considering the particulars of this case, what precisely would a jail sentence be deterring?  Would it deter a prospective offender from committing a similar offense, or if jail was inevitable, would it deter an offender who committed a similar offence from doing the right thing and prospectively turning themself in?
          As stated by the Court in R v Fraser, 2007 ABCA 386 (CanLII), 2007ABCA 386 at para 17:
Part of the objectives of the law are not merely to deter criminals, but to enhance public respect for the law, to invigorate the confidence of the public in justice, and to affirm that where an offender takes steps to promptly admit guilt, to take full or fuller responsibility than even accused against that person, and to make reparations, such conduct deserves considerable weight. [Emphasis added.]
          Although Fraser is not a child sexual offence case, the same sentencing principle should apply. 
          I also refer to a recent Alberta Court of Appeal decision R v Friesen 2022 ABCA 147 (Friesen ABCA).  In Friesen ABCA the Crown appealed a CSO of 24 months less a day followed by two years’ probation after a conviction following a guilty plea for one count of possession of child pornography, contrary to s 163.1(4) CC.  The facts revealed that after the police completed their investigation, the accused was found to have possessed 102 unique images of child pornography on his phone, depicting girls between the ages of six and 16 years old, and six unique videos of child pornography depicting children between the ages of 10 and 14 years old.  The accused was 21 years old with a high school education and a promising music career.  He grew up in a dysfunctional family and at an early age he had been sexually abused by an adopted uncle.  After being charged the accused began counselling and therapy for addictions and sexual deviancy.  At the time of sentencing, he had completed treatment.  Three reports were entered at sentencing: one assessed the offender as a low risk of reoffending and the other two opined that due to his progress in treatment no further counselling or therapy was recommended. The Court stated at para 52:
The sentencing judge correctly noted that incarceration will usually provide more denunciation and deterrence than a conditional sentence order, but that in some circumstances a conditional sentence can achieve those goals, particularly where the conditions are onerous and the order is for a longer duration than a candidate jail sentence would be.
          Among other things the Crown argued that the sentencing judge erred in finding that the accused’s circumstances were exceptional.  The Court disagreed saying at para 56:  
...[W]hat separated the respondent’s circumstances from other perpetrators of the same offence were: (1) the extent of the collateral consequences suffered by the respondent were greater than those normally suffered by offenders convicted of possessing child pornography; and (2) that he had deep insight into the wrongfulness of child pornography, he was remorseful, had taken considerable steps to treat his predilection for child pornography and was completely rehabilitated. 
          The Court commented that it was open to the sentencing judge to find that the impact on the accused for the loss of his music career was exceptional, and that complete or near complete rehabilitation at the time of sentencing was unusual, and it was not unreasonable to categorize his rehabilitative progress as exceptional (at para 58).  The Court upheld the CSO. 
          In the case before me, I find the circumstances exceptional.  The fact that Wall voluntarily and without duress, attended the police station and disclosed his offence, tells me that he was remorseful and took full responsibility -- or in the words of Fraser “fuller responsibility than even accused [of]” -- for his offending behaviour.  The fact that from the outset he advised he wanted to plead guilty, entered a guilty plea prior to any trial date being scheduled, is a youthful offender with no prior criminal record, and has complied with all his release conditions, further reassures this Court that he is little risk to the community.  Given these unique circumstances, I find that denunciation and deterrence can be met by the imposition of a CSO of two years less a day followed by two years’ probation.  
          The Crown also sought the following mandatory orders: a 20-year SOIRA Order and a DNA Order, both of which are granted.
          The Crown also sought a discretionary forfeiture order of the offender’s cell phone, and any other items seized by the police, as offence-related property.  I was informed that the police had deleted the images from the offender’s phone.  If that is the case, then I see no need to forfeit the phone.  I was not advised of any other offence-related property that was seized but am willing to address this separate from this decision should I be advised of any.
          The final discretionary order being sought by the Crown was a discretionary s 161 Order, prohibiting the offender for a period of 10 years from: 
i)                   Seeking, obtaining, or continuing employment, whether or not the employment is remunerated, that involves being in a position of trust or authority towards persons under the age of 16 years.
ii)                 Becoming or being a volunteer in a capacity that involves being in a position of trust or authority towards persons under the age of 16 years.
iii)               Having any contact – including communicating by means – with a person who is under the age of 16 years.
•         He may communicate via telephone or video call or be in the presence of a person under 16 years of age provided he has the permission of the parent or guardian and he is directly supervised by a responsible adult at all times.
•         The “responsible adult” must be aware of the criminal convictions. 
•         “Directly supervised” requires that the responsible adult must be in his physical presence, or in the physical presence of the person under the age of 16 in the case of telephone or video calls, and the responsible adult must be able to both see and hear him at all times, or only hear him in the case of a telephone call.
•         This condition does not apply to incidental or superficial contact with persons under the age of 16 who are:
•         Customers at his workplace, or
•         Employed at other places of business, as long as such contact is necessary for him to conduct transactions there as a customer.
iv)               Subject to iii) above, using the Internet or other digital network to communicate with a person under the age of 16 years or who the offender believes is under the age of 16 years.
          Defense counsel was opposed to the imposition of the discretionary s 161 Order arguing that it would be an undue hardship on Wall as it would limit his interactions with his son.
          I agree that prohibiting Wall from any contact, including communicating by any means unless directly supervised, can cause undue hardship for Wall to maintain regular contact with his son.  Given my findings, I do not find it is in the public interest to restrict Wall from all forms of contact with persons under the age of 16 years old.  He will be prohibited pursuant to s 161(1)(b) for a period of five years from seeking employment or volunteering in situations where he is in position of trust or authority towards persons under the age of 16; he will further be prohibited, for a period of five years, from having any communication via telephone, Internet, or digital network with any person under the age of 16 years unless that child’s guardian is aware of Wall’s conviction, has provided their consent, and has the ability, should they wish, to monitor any communications that they have approved take place. As suggested by the Crown this does not include incidental contact that may necessarily occur via telephone, Internet or digital network with a customer at Wall’s workplace, or necessary contact that Wall may have as a customer himself. 
