./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/pc/2023abpc6.html
              Mr. Pandit (Pandit) pled guilty to two counts of fraud over $5000.  The first offence involved one complainant, Saraswati Singh (Dr. Singh) and the second offence involved two complainants, Harman Bhatti and Jaskaran Bhatti.  Both offences occurred between June 1, 2017 and July 31, 2018. 
              Entered as Exhibit S#1 was an Agreed Statement of Facts (ASF). 
              One of the complainants, Dr. Singh, was the owner of several businesses. He employed Pandit as a bookkeeper between 2016 and 2018.  Pandit had access to all Dr. Singh’s business banking records
              The second complainant, Mr. Jaskaran Bhatti, is the owner of Preet Janitorial.  He employed Pandit as his bookkeeper from 2013.  
              The final complainant, Mr. Harman Bhatti, is Jaskaran Bhatti’s son, who owned Aim Janitorial.  He had also employed Pandit as a bookkeeper for his business since 2013.  
              On June 14, 2017, Pandit opened a bank account at the Bank of Nova Scotia, which I will refer to as the Pandit Account.
              During the relevant time, Pandit acquired 91 cheques from Dr. Singh, which he then diverted into the Pandit Account, thereby misappropriating the funds for his own use.  The total of the 91 cheques was $238,000.
              In relation to Mr. Jaskaran Bhatti, Pandit took 21 cheques from Preet Janitorial and diverted them into the Pandit Account, the total amount taken was $105,246.
              Pandit took 23 cheques from Mr. Harman Bhatti, for a total of $99,600.
          Pandit did not cease his criminal behavior until it was detected, and his employment was terminated.  
          The total funds misappropriated by Pandit from the 3 complainants was $443,206.
          After Pandit was arrested, he made full restitution to Jaskaran Bhatti and Harman Bhatti, by means of transferring a property to Jaskaran Bhatti, who then reimbursed his son for his losses 
           Dr. Singh filed a civil action against Pandit on September 7, 2020. Subsequently, a Settlement Agreement was reached.  As a result, the Crown is not seeking any further restitution on behalf of any of the complainants
          The following were entered as Exhibits at the sentencing hearing:
S#1 – Agreed Statement of Facts
S#2 – Defense Book of Supporting Documents (which included Tabs 1-8).
S#3 – Victim Impact Statement (VIS) provided directly to the Crown by Dr. Singh (excised).
S#4 – Unexcised VIS that was filed with the Court by Dr. Singh (confirmed to be the same VIS as S#3).
S#5 – Restitution request provided by Dr. Singh that the Crown advised they would not be seeking
S#6 – Hansard Excerpts from the House of Commons and House of Senate Debates
S#7- Letter of support authored by Punita Pandit, wife of the accused.
 
II. Pandit’s Personal Antecedents
 
          Pandit is 49 years old.  He was born in India and immigrated to the United States in 2000, and later moved to Edmonton in 2007.  Pandit is married with two daughters, ages 16 and 17.  He received his Bachelor and Master of Commerce at the University of Bombay, followed by his Bachelor of Law at the same university.
          In reviewing his “Statement of Personal Background” which was included in Exhibit #2 at Tab 1, Pandit was employed as an accountant for several different companies and organizations continually since 2000. While employed with the Bhatti family from 2013 to 2018, Pandit was had employment with Little Einstein Daycare and Dr. Singh. I further note that Pandit is presently gainfully employed as payroll administrator for a construction company. 
          Pandit has no prior criminal record.
          Pandit claims to have a history of significant mental health issues, including depression, anxiety, and alcohol abuse.
          Included within Tab 3 of Exhibit S#2 was an alcohol/drug assessment prepared by Christopher Suchit, Addictions Counselor.  Pandit was diagnosed as having “engaged in alcohol consumption at the Dependence Level”. (Page 5 of report).  Both counsel agreed that Mr. Suchit was not qualified to provide an opinion on Pandit’s level of risk to reoffend, but no issue was taken regarding the diagnosis itself.  
          Submissions were made to suggest that Pandit had suffered a stroke in 2016 which significantly affected his health.  After sentencing submissions were made, Defense counsel, with the consent of the Crown, forwarded an email to the Court with an attachment.  The attachment was a letter dated Dec. 23, 2022 and authored by Dr. Hamza Alqaser, Family Physician with the Sturgeon Medical Clinic.  The letter states: “This is to certify that Girish Pandit had CT exam last 2016 and results shown that he had stroke.”  Although this was not entered as an exhibit at the time of the sentencing submissions, counsel advised it was their intention to have this letter marked as a formal exhibit on the next court appearance.  As such, this document will become Exhibit S#8.
III. Positions of the Parties
 
          These are indictable offences. The maximum jail sentence is 14 years’ incarceration. 
          The Crown seeks a sentence of 2 years’ incarceration.  
          Additionally, the Crown seeks an ancillary order pursuant to s 380.2 of the Criminal Code (CC) prohibiting Pandit from seeking, obtaining, or continuing any employment or becoming or being a volunteer in any capacity, that involves having authority over the real property, money or valuable security of another person. 
          As already mentioned, no further restitution order in being requested.
          The Accused argues that the appropriate sentence is an 18-month Conditional Sentence Order (CSO). 
 
IV. Principles of Sentencing
 
A. Objectives of Sentencing
          The Criminal Code (CC) says that the fundamental purpose of sentencing is to “...contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions that have one or more...” of the objectives set out in s 718 of the CC.   Those enumerated objectives are denunciation, deterrence, rehabilitation, reparation, to promote a sense of responsibility in the offender and acknowledgment of harm done, and to separate the offender where necessary, bearing in mind that s 718.2(d) and (e) CC states that one should not be deprived of liberty, if less restrictive sanctions are appropriate.  
          There is no doubt that denunciation and deterrence are important sentencing objectives when sentencing Pandit for these offences of fraud over $5000.  These are serious crimes  
          Our Court of Appeal in R v Fulcher, 2007 ABCA 381 (Fulcher) at para 27 and R v Oliphant (1995), 1995 ABCA 492 (Oliphant) at para 5 clearly stated that in cases of embezzlement, general deterrence is of overwhelming importance.
          In response to the proclamation that general deterrence is of overwhelming importance in embezzlement cases, Defense cited the recent decision in R v Bissonnette, 2022 SCC 23 (Bissonnette) as support for the proposition that using incarceration as a means of achieving general deterrence is questionable. Defense referred to para 47 which reads:
…General deterrence is an objective that must be weighed by a court, but the effectiveness of which has often been questioned.  These legitimate reservations notwithstanding, the fact remains that the certainty of punishment, together with the entire range of criminal sanctions, does produce a certain deterrent effect, albeit one that is difficult to evaluate, on possible offenders (Ruby, at s 1.31; Canadian Sentencing Commission, Sentencing Reform:  A Canadian Approach (1987), at pp. 136-38). 
          Bissonnette involved an offender who opened fire on a Mosque full of worshippers, killing six people and seriously injuring five more.  The accused pled guilty to the 12 counts against him, including six counts of first-degree murder.  First degree murder carries a mandatory life sentence with parole eligibility only after an offender has served 25 years.  The Crown requested that s 745.51 CC apply.  This provision authorized a Court to order that the periods without eligibility for parole be served consecutively.  Bissonnette challenged the constitutionality of s 745.51 CC, arguing it breached his rights protected under ss 7 and 12 of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms (Charter) and that it was not saved by s 1.  The Court agreed and found s 745.51 CC unconstitutional.    
          I wholeheartedly agree with the Courts’ comments concerning the effectiveness of general deterrence.  The Court in Bissonnette commented: “[g]eneral deterrence is an objective that must be weighed by a court, but the effectiveness of which has often been questioned.” However, the Court did not say that general deterrence was obsolete and no longer played any role in sentencing an offender.  In fact, the Court went on to say: “These legitimate reservations notwithstanding, the fact remains that the certainty of punishment, together with the entire range of criminal sanctions, does produce a certain deterrent effect, albeit one that is difficult to evaluate, on possible offenders” (Bissonnette at para 47).
          I find that the objective of general deterrence can have more or less impact, depending on the offender and type of offence committed.  
          As stated in several authoritative cases, offenders who commit white collar crime engage in a process of weighing the risks and benefits and will roughly calculate the odds. If jail is unlikely, then embezzlement may look like an attractive business proposition. The more likely they are to be incarcerated if caught, the more they are likely to be deterred. (R v Bracegirdle, 2004 ABCA 252 (Bracegirdle) at para 34; R v McKinnon, 2005 ABCA 8 (McKinnon) at para 61).  
          As stated by the Court in McKinnon at paras 59-63 and Fulcher at para 27, general deterrence is of overwhelming importance in cases of systematic embezzlement from employers. At para 44, the Court in Fulcher continued by saying:
In crimes of embezzlement, the sentencing goals of denunciation and deterrence take on a particular importance.  If this conditional sentence order were left standing, anyone else working in a similar capacity of trust for a similar employer could readily see an obvious blueprint for quick wealth.  It shows how to get hundreds of thousands of dollars almost effortlessly with only the potential burden of a conditional sentence of house arrest to fear.
          Further, the Court in Fulcher commented that it is common for offenders who commit these types of offences to come before the court with no prior criminal record, thus diminishing the need for further individual deterrence.  However, as the Court stated at para 29, “that in no way detracts from the need for general deterrence.” 
          Incarceration may not be as effective in meeting the objective of general deterrence when we are sentencing an unsophisticated offender for an impulsive offence committed in the heat of the moment.  However, when sentencing a well-educated offender who has over time committed an offence that took planning and deliberation, general deterrence carries more weight. (McKinnon at paras 60-63; Bracegirdle at para 34)
          In this case the objectives which are paramount are denunciation and deterrence, and while rehabilitation is always something a Court needs to consider, such a consideration will depend on the offence and the offender.  I will come back to rehabilitation later in this decision. 
 
B. Proportionality
 
          As stated by the Court in Bissonnette: “sentencing must in all circumstances be guided by the cardinal principle of proportionality. The sentence must be severe enough to denounce the offence but must not exceed “what is just and appropriate, given the moral blameworthiness of the offender and the gravity of the offence” (at para 50).  
          This principle is also legislated pursuant to s 718.1 CC which states that “[a] sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.”
          Pandit’s offences were not impulsive crimes committed in the heat of the moment, nor could either of these offences be described as one-off crimes of opportunity.  Fraud of this nature is sophisticated, planned, and deliberate.  Pandit abused a position of trust, which both case law and s 718.2 CC has deemed to be an aggravating factor.  Pandit misappropriated funds over a period of 13 months involving multiple transactions, the value of the fraud was significant (amounting to over $440K), and the frauds involved three separate victims Pandit never ceased until he was caught, and despite being advised that he was suffering with financial difficulties, I find that the offences were motived by greed.  
          No evidence was tendered as to what Pandit did with the misappropriated funds.  However, his ability to promptly transfer a property to pay the Bhatti family the money he had misappropriated, is telling.  A further indicator that Pandit was not in financial ruin at the time of committing these offences, is the fact that in 2020, when Dr. Singh filed a Statement of Claim against Pandit, he also filed 13 Certificates of Lis Pendens against property that Pandit or Pandit’s numbered company owned.  Some of these properties may have been encumbered, but a man with 13 properties who appropriates close to a half a million dollars is acting out of greed.
          There is evidence to suggest that Pandit lives with alcohol dependency. I will accept that his dependency could have predated the commission of these offences.  However, as stated in R v McTighe, 2005 ABCA 30 (McTighe) at para 18: addiction is not to be considered a mitigating factor, nor an extenuating circumstance.
          There was a suggestion that Pandit lives with mental health issues.  However, there was no evidence to suggest his mental health issues impacted his offending behavior.  Within Exhibit S#2 at Tabs 4 through 6 were medical documents from Alberta Health Services revealing that Pandit was admitted to hospital on November 22, 2019, for a suicide attempt.  All medical documents provided relating to Pandit’s mental health post-dated his offending behavior.  Included within Exhibit S#2, Tab 6, is a document dated December 13, 2019, titled “AHE Day Hospital Admission Note”.  At page 1 of 5, under the heading “Psychiatric History” it reads: 
Client reports his difficulties began Nov 21, 2019 – when he was called by police and asked to go into station.  Client did so and was then arrested and kept in cells/an interview room for 18 hours.  Reports he was charged with embezzlement in relation to a job he had in 2017 – reports the police presented him with evidence, denies all accusations He reports that while in holding [cells] he made the decision to end his life. 
          In relation to any physical ailment that Pandit may have suffered with, and which could have impacted his moral culpability, I have evidence that a CT scan was done on Pandit in 2016 which indicated he had suffered a stroke.  I have no evidence as to the severity of the stroke, or even when he had suffered the stroke.  However, I do know that based on Pandit’s employment record which was provided in Exhibit #2, Tab 1, Pandit was gainfully employed continuously from 2000 to 2018.  As such, there is no indication that the stroke had any profound effect on Pandit’s ability to earn an income.  In fact, it was during this same time that Pandit was employed as an accountant for Dr. Singh, Jaskaran Bhatti, and Harman Bhatti. 
          In assessing proportionality, I find the offences Pandit committed were serious and his moral culpability falls on the high end of the moral culpability spectrum.
          As for mitigating factors not considered in the proportionality analysis, Pandit’s guilty plea is mitigating.  
          Restitution is also mitigating. However, while an offender should be given some credit for significant and prompt restitution, that should not be gilded as voluntary, nor as reliable proof of repentance or remorse.  Any competent counsel would tell their client that restitution is likely one of the few mitigating factors to be considered in sentencing.  (McKinnon at paras 88-91).
          The Court continued, stating: 
The sentence should be lower than it would have been without restitution, but it should not be radically different. (McKinnon at para 92).
          As for aggravating factors, pursuant to s 718.2(a)(iii) CC, Pandit abused a position of trust to commit these offences; further s 380.1 CC, sets out several factors that are to be considered as aggravating when sentencing an offender who commits fraud.  Although I mention these, I have already considered these statutorily aggravating factors in the proportionality assessment.  As such, I will not double count them under the heading of additional aggravating or statutorily aggravating factors    
 
C. Parity
 
          Counsel supplied me with a plethora of case law. 
          Prior to reviewing the relevant cases I wish to make a few comments
          Defense counsel argued that a CSO was available and a fit and appropriate sentence.
          The Crown conceded that a CSO was available but disagreed on it being a fit sentence.
          Defense argued for a CSO, in part, because Bill C-5 recently received Royal Assent and did not preclude offences of fraud over $5000 from receiving a CSO.  Defense referred to excerpts from Hansard House of Commons and House of Senate Debates to support that a CSO should be contemplated.  Additionally, Defense counsel pointed to the fact that s 380(1.1) CC which maintained a mandatory minimum punishment of 2 years incarceration for a fraud over one million dollars ($1M) was another indicator that Parliament deemed incarceration to be mandatory only for those fraud cases of significant value.  
          I have read the excerpts referred to in the House of Commons and Senate Debates My interpretation is that the Member, Mr. Gary Anandasangaree in the House of Commons, and Senator Marc Gold were simply providing the House and Senate with an overview of the benefits of a CSO.  A CSO allows an offender who does not pose a risk to society to serve his/her sentence within the community on strict conditions This would allow an offender and society to benefit by allowing the offender to continue with employment, education, family commitments, addiction treatment, and health related concerns The speaker in the House of Commons stated on December 13, 2021 at page 1035: “Our government is taking steps to ensure that the strong hand of criminal justice is used where it is needed to keep people safe, but not where it would be discriminatory or counter-productive.” As stated in the House of Senate Debates on June 20, 2022: “Bill C-5 reserves harsh penalties for serious criminal behaviour while recognizing that in some cases, the interests of justice and public safety are better served by flexible and creative approaches to sentencing or even by the absence of sentencing…”  However, as stated in the June 14, 2022 debate at page 6646: “…it is not about giving every offender a conditional sentence.”  
          An offence contrary to s 380(1)(a) CC is an offence of fraud over $5000.  As with many offences, the severity of the offence can be influenced by several factors.  There is a significant monetary difference between $5000 and $1M, as are there significantly different circumstances in how a fraud can be committed.  Certainly, the value of the fraud will be a factor to consider. As will such factors as:  was there a breach of trust, was the fraud a single event or did it involve multiple transactions over an extended period of time, how many victims were involved, did the offender cease his/her criminal behavior prior to detection, did the accused disclose the frauds prior to detection, did the offender suffer with significant mental health concerns that contributed to his/her offending behavior, was full restitution made, and was there an early guilty plea. Once it has been determined that the offender is not a risk to the public, it is not simply a determination of the value of the fraud committed that will determine if a CSO is appropriate, but instead it requires an assessment of the seriousness of the offending behavior and the moral culpability of the offender. 
          Counsel provided me with the following cases – all of which I have thoroughly read:  Bissonnette; R v Bunn, 2000 SCC 9 (Bunn); R v Evanson, 2019 ABCA 122 (Evanson); R v Tran, 2021 ONSC 1888 (Tran); R v Sampson, 2016 ONCJ 128 (Sampson); R v Callender, 2009 CanlII 72039 (ON SC) (Callender); R v Fehr, 2001 SKCA 37 (Fehr); R v Kratky, 1997 CanLii 936 (BC SC) (Kratky); Bracegirdle;  R v Fraser, 2007 ABCA 386 (Fraser); Fulcher; McKinnon; McTigue; R v Miles, 2011 ABCA 133 (Miles); R v Nguyen, 2011 ABCA 300 (Nguyen); Oliphant; R v Watkinson, 2001 ABCA 83 (Watkinson); R v Zenari, 2012 ABCA 279 (Zenari).
          Several of these cases were provided for sentencing principles, while others were referred to for the purposes of parity.  
          Parity requires that a similar sentence be imposed for a similar offender who commits a similar offence.  Thus, the facts relied on are an important part of parity, and binding cases within our jurisdiction have greater precedential value. 
          Defense supplied seven fraud cases. Of the seven cases, Evanson was the only one from Alberta, Bunn was a decision from the SCC, and the remaining five were from out of jurisdiction.  
          Evanson involved a fraud of $545,773. The accused was an insurance broker who created fake client accounts and increased commission reports fraudulently.  The offences occurred over a ten-year period, and the monies were used to cover day-to-day expenses.  Only $25,000 had been paid back at the time of sentencing.  The accused pled guilty.  The Court of Appeal overturned the 14-month jail sentence and imposed a period of incarceration of two years less a day.  
          Bunn, which was the most persuasive case provided, involved a lawyer who had misappropriated trust monies.  The total amount converted was approximately $86,000.  Once discovered by the Law Society, the accused was suspended from practicing law and later disbarred.  The accused had one daughter and was the sole provider for his family.  His wife was disabled and confined to a wheelchair.  The Pre-Sentence Report disclosed that the accused was acutely aware of what he had lost, including a 20-year career as a lawyer, and the respect of the public and his peers.  As referred to in the decision at para 4, “[h]e suffered ‘humiliation and torment … amplified with the realization that his invalid wife and teenage daughter must share in the embarrassment and debasement of his personal debacle’.”  In upholding the CSO, the SCC commented that “…the ruin and humiliation that Mr. Bunn had brought down upon himself and his family, together with the loss of his professional status, could provide sufficient denunciation and deterrence when coupled with a conditional sentence of two years less a day with house arrest.”  Also taken into consideration as mitigating by the court in upholding the CSO was the fact that the accused was “the sole provider and caregiver for both his wife, who suffered from multiple sclerosis and had been confined to a wheelchair for years, and their teenage daughter.” (Bunn at para 23)
          The facts in Bunn are strikingly different from the case before this Court.  First, the value of the fraud was $86,000 versus $443,206.  Bunn had been suffering financial woes for many years. As previously mentioned, there was no evidence that Pandit was experiencing any financial woe.  Rather, I find Pandit’s offending behaviour was motivated by greed. Unlike Bunn, Pandit has been able to maintain employment in the area of accounting/payroll.  From the letters of support provided it does not appear that Pandit’s reputation has suffered, or if so, not to the extent that Bunn’s legal career was ruined.  Further, Pandit’s wife is employed as disclosed in Exhibit #2, Tab 6, page 4 under the title “Finance”, unlike Bunn who was the sole provider of his family and was the caregiver of his daughter and wife who was disabled and confined to a wheelchair. 
          As for the other cases provided by Defense that supported the imposition of a CSO, all those cases were from out of our jurisdiction and as such were of less precedential value.
          The Crown supplied ten Alberta Court of Appeal (ABCA) decisions.  Seven of the ten cases imposed a jail sentence.
          Fraser involved a bookkeeper who breached a position of trust to misappropriate $132,160.96.  The Court replaced a 12-month jail sentence with a 12-month CSO.  The Court decided that:
…[T]he crucial question on sentencing was whether the unfortunate circumstances in her life, plus her complete co-operation with the authorities by restitution and guilty plea, plus the inordinate delay in prosecution [4 years after the crime was detected and the accused made more than full restitution] with its consequent seriously prejudicial effects upon the appellant, justified the application to her case of s 742.1 of the Criminal Code,…”  (Fraser at para 6).  
          The Court found that it was not merely the accused’s cooperation or restitution, nor the accused’s personal difficulties which actuated the crime, that were the decisive factors on their own.  Nor was the inordinate delay itself decisive, which often can result from the complexity of these types of cases, or as a product of the offender’s conduct.  Rather, it was the combination of all these factors, “coupled with the demonstrably prejudicial and even destructive effect upon the life of the [accused] over a period of five years from the process of the law itself.” (Fraser at para 18).
          Nguyen involved a pharmacy tech who stole $8,900 over eight months.  The offender kept a journal for the purposes of repayment.  Once caught, he immediately confessed and turned over the journal.  The original sentence imposed was a conditional discharge.  The Court of Appeal reiterated that only in truly exceptional circumstances would a CSO be warranted.  Given the Crown’s position in support of a CSO, the Court was satisfied that the circumstances justified such a sentence (at para 8). 
          Watkinson involved an insurance adjuster who made $120,000 in payments to a third party and profited $16,000 through secret commissions.  The scheme involved 44 transactions.  She cooperated once caught, but no restitution was made.  She was granted an 18-month CSO, which was upheld by the Court of Appeal.  Watkinson appears to be one of the first cases decided post-Proulx (R v Proulx, 2000 SCC 5).  The Court placed significant weight on the preconditions that must be met before a CSO could be contemplated and decided that, despite the importance of denunciation and deterrence in fraud cases that involved a breach of trust, the Court was satisfied that in this case a CSO was consistent with the fundamental purposes and principles of sentencing. 
          As stated by the Court in McKinnon at para 76:
One can find an occasional appellate decision which approves a conditional sentence for embezzlement, but the great majority do not.  Those which do invariably involve special circumstances and a first offender.  The great majority of appellate decisions send embezzlers to jail.  
          These cases highlight, that despite the seriousness of a breach of trust fraud, in exceptional circumstances, a CSO may nonetheless be warranted.  But as has been reiterated in several decisions, “absent truly exceptional circumstances, the sentencing goals of deterrence and denunciation demand a sentence of imprisonment…” (Fulcher at para 30; McKinnon at paras 13-15; Bracegirdle at para 42; McTighe at paras 23 and 28).
          In Miles, at para 32, counsel for the offender suggested that the accused’s guilty plea, the fact that she appeared before the court with no prior criminal record, and that she had made partial restitution were exceptional circumstances that supported the imposition of a CSO.  The Court disagreed.  The Court reminded us that it was not unusual for an offender who commits these types of offences, to come before the court with no prior criminal record.  A criminal record would, in most instances, preclude someone from obtaining employment that would put them in a position that these offenders find themselves.  Nor was a guilty plea exceptional.  A review of these cases indicated that a guilty plea was often entered once the theft was detected.  Finally, while restitution was a mitigating factor, it was not unusual.  The Court stated that none of these factors, either alone or together, put this case into the realm of “exceptional circumstances”. 
 
V. Conclusion
          Defense argued that Pandit’s circumstances would warrant a CSO.  The collective circumstances that were argued to be exceptional, were as follows:
a)      Admitted his guilt almost immediately after his offences were discovered and entered guilty pleas on May 4, 2021.
b)       No prior criminal record.
c)      Has not reoffended since being on bail.
d)      Made full restitution to Jaskaran and Harman Bhatti and entered a settlement agreement with Dr. Singh on November 1, 2020. 
e)      Pandit has a history of mental health issues with one recorded incident of attempted suicide in November 2019.
f)       He struggles with alcohol consumption.
g)      Has strong family and community support.
h)      Pandit is a husband and father of two children.  He is a highly educated and pro-social man with a Masters in Commerce and a Bachelor of Laws 
          I disagree that these factors, either individually or collectively, catapult Pandit’s circumstances into the exceptional.
          The fact that once detected Pandit pled guilty and that he has no prior criminal record is not exceptional, but the norm in these types of cases.  (Miles at para 32; Oliphant at para 5).
          While restitution should be considered mitigating and reduce one’s sentence, “it should not be radically different” (McKinnon at para 92. See also:  Oliphant at para 8; Zenari at para 16).
          Significant mental health issues, coupled with a guilty plea, complete restoration, and an inordinate delay in the prosecution could support the imposition of a CSO (Fraser).  However, I find Pandit’s mental health issues arose after his crimes were detected and had no bearing on his offending behavior.  
          “Good character is far from a distinguishing factor in cases such as these.” (Fulcher para 35).
          Addiction is neither mitigating or an extenuating circumstance. (McTighe at para 18). While addiction issues may provide an explanation for an offender’s conduct, it does not provide an excuse.
          The fact that Pandit continues to receive support from his family and community is not an exceptional factor in mitigation. Fortunate, yes, but not exceptional.  
          Additionally, s 380.1(2) CC reads: 
When a court imposes a sentence for an offence referred to in section 380, …, it shall not consider as mitigating circumstances the offender’s employment, employment skills or status or reputation in the community if those circumstances were relevant to, contributed to or were used in the commission of the offence.
          The reason Pandit was able to secure employment as a bookkeeper was because of his reputation, education, and employment skills 
          Based on the above analysis I find that a CSO would not be consistent with the fundamental purpose and principle of sentencing set out in ss 718 to 718.2 CC. 
          As stated by the Court in Proulx at para 107:
Incarceration, which is ordinarily a harsher sanction, may provide more deterrence than a conditional sentence… there may be circumstances in which the need for deterrence will warrant incarceration. This will depend in part on whether the offence is one in which the effects of incarceration are likely to have a real deterrent effect, as well as on the circumstances of the community in which the offences were committed.
          I find a fit and proportionate sentence to be 18 months incarceration.
          As for ancillary orders, pursuant to s 380.2 CC, I further prohibit Pandit from seeking, obtaining, or continuing any employment or becoming or being a volunteer in any capacity, that involves having authority over the real property, money, or valuable security of another person for a period of 5 years. 
