./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/pc/2023abpc9.html
              The defence has brought an application for further disclosure. The Crown’s position is that all relevant disclosure has been made. Hence an application to the court to decide. The defence application for further disclosure, as best I can determine, lists 179 items they demand be disclosed. It is difficult to quantify because the demand incorporates items within items. The application and evidence called by defence was heard in a voir dire. 
              The accused was stopped and arrested while driving a motor vehicle by the police in the execution of a warrant of apprehension issued by Corrections Canada. During the search of his motor vehicle a number of firearms were located in the vehicle that are the subject of the charges. Defence are demanding disclosure of not only all items related to the investigation leading to the arrest but all items of an investigation into the discharge of a firearm in a residence some five months previous where the accused’s fingerprints were found on a paper cup in the residence. The accused is not facing charges in relation to that incident but the fingerprint finding is the basis for Corrections Canada issuing the warrant to apprehend the accused who was on statutory release from a sentence he was serving. The disclosure demand includes all material related to police investigations involving the accused over those five months. In addition they demand the disclosure of a video interview of the accused the day after his arrest. They also demand full disclosure of the fingerprint analysis. 
              Further they demand third party disclosure of a number of Calgary Police Service policies and third party disclosure of Corrections Canada records, reports, notes, correspondence, etc. pertaining to the accused’s parole from February 7, 2022 to the present. As best I can tell those items listed all add up to 72 items demanded from Corrections Canada. 
              In the voir dire the defence called six witnesses, consisting of five police officers, and one parole officer. I have received written submissions and heard oral submissions from both parties as well as counsel for Corrections Canada and counsel for the Calgary Police Service. Counsel for the police submitted they have already provided their policies requested by defence, so that is no longer an issue in the Application.
The Law of Disclosure 
              The defence in their submissions on the law refer to the Marshall Inquiry which is the basis for the Supreme Court setting out a regime for disclosure. In Marshall a key eye witness gave an exculpatory statement. After being interviewed by police he gave a second statement that was inculpatory. Only the second statement was disclosed and Marshall was convicted. Both statements should have been disclosed. The Commission made recommendations as to what should be disclosed by the Crown, primarily statements of witnesses produced as a result of the police investigation whether inculpatory or exculpatory. 
              In R v Stinchcombe, 1991 CanLII 45 (SCC), 3 SCR 326, the Supreme Court took the opportunity to incorporate the Marshall Inquiry recommendations into law and set out a disclosure regime. In Stinchcombe, the accused’s secretary gave evidence at preliminary favourable to the accused. The police then took a statement from her. As a result the Crown decided not to call her as a witness as she was not credible. The defence was advised she gave a statement but would not provide it to the defence. The trial judge did not order it to be disclosed. The Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal without reasons. The Supreme Court determined it should have been disclosed and ordered a new trial. In doing so they set out a disclosure regime incorporating the Marshall Inquiry recommendations. They set out a duty on the Crown to disclose all material evidence whether favourable to the accused or not. However this obligation is not absolute. The evidence must be relevant. It is up to the Crown to determine relevance acting responsibly. In turn defence counsel as officers of the court must also act responsibly to resolve disputes. When they cannot, the matter should be referred by Application to the trial judge to resolve by holding a voir dire. Disclosure is commonly referred to as the fruits of the investigation. The Supreme Court stated full disclosure would result in time being saved through increased guilty pleas, withdrawal of charges, and shortening or waiver of preliminary hearings. 
              The Supreme Court expanded disclosure in R v O’Connor, 1995 CanLII 51 (SCC), 4 SCR 411 by setting out a regime for third party records. In R v McNeil, 2009 SCC 3 they expanded O’Connor to include production of disciplinary records and criminal investigation files in possession of the police relating to police officers involved in the investigation of the accused. The first step in an O’Connor or McNeil application is for the person seeking production to satisfy the court that the documents are likely relevant to the proceedings. 
              In R v Gubbins, 2018 SCC 44, the Supreme Court expanded the issue of “likely relevant” to mean if there is a reasonable possibility that the information is logically probative to an issue at trial or to the competence of a witness to testify. The accused must discharge this burden before the judge will examine the record to determine whether and to what extent it should be produced. This depends on whether the information can be qualified as being part of the fruits of the investigation or obviously relevant. The Supreme Court defined “fruits of the investigation” as police investigative files, not their operational records or background information. It refers to information generated or acquired during or as a result of the specific investigation into the charges against the accused. 
              One other authority is worthy of note which comes from Justice Doherty in R v Girimonte, (1997) 1997 CanLII 1866 (ON CA), 121 CCC (3d) 33 (Ont. C.A.) mentioned by the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal in R v Anderson, 2013 SKCA 92 as follows at paragraph 12.
Disclosure demands which are no more than “fishing expeditions”, seeking everything short of the proverbial kitchen sink undermine the good faith and candour which should govern the conduct of counsel. ... It would be obvious to anyone that the prosecution would resist compliance with such a far fetched demand. Disclosure demands like some of those made in this case seem calculated to create needless controversy and waste valuable resources rather than to assist the accused in making full answer and defence. 
          It seems to me the same could be said about many of the items demanded be disclosed in the application before me. 
Analysis
          With this law in mind, I now turn to the specific demands for disclosure in this Application. 
          Dealing first with the demand for the records of Corrections Canada, I agree with the submissions of counsel from Corrections Canada and the Crown that this court is not the right forum to challenge the issuance of the warrant of apprehension. That is the purview of the Federal system. That is made clear by the Court of Appeal in Ali El Sayed v Canada, 2022 ABCA 188 as well as R v Bird, 2019 SCC 7 and R v Consolidated Maybrun Mines Ltd., 1998 CanLII 820 (SCC), 1 SCR 706 as cited in the written submission of counsel for Corrections Canada. These records are not obviously relevant or part of the fruits of the investigation of the charges the accused is facing. According to the parole officer the warrant was issued as a result of the finding of the accused’s fingerprint at the scene of the discharge of the firearm some five months prior to the arrest. The correctness of the issuance of the warrant is a matter for the Federal system. I would not order those records be disclosed as fruits of the investigation of the charges in the Information.
          Similarly the investigation into the discharge of the firearm at a residence in March, and the finding of the fingerprint is a separate investigation and is not relevant to the charges in the Information. He is not facing charges relating to that incident and I can see no obvious relevance to the charges he is facing in this trial. That investigation is not related to the investigation of these charges and therefore is not fruits of the investigation. It does not refer to information generated or acquired during or as a result of the specific investigation into the charges the accused is facing. I would not order information or records from that investigation be disclosed. 
          What must be disclosed is any and all material relating to the investigation that led to these charges. The police are obligated to execute any warrant of apprehension issued by Corrections Canada. From the evidence I heard it appears the execution of the warrant began with Detective McPherson. It appears he made the decision to effect the arrest and planned it. Detective Crawford and Constable Futers were also involved. A surveillance team was set up at his residence and when he left in his vehicle he was surveilled until McPherson decided when it was safe to effect the arrest. At that point street constables were directed to physically pull his vehicle over and make the arrest. Subsequently a search warrant was obtained to search the vehicle by Detective Thomas. The next day Detective Neufeld conducted an interview with the accused which was for the primary purpose of investigating the discharge of the weapon in the residence to see if the accused had any information about that incident. 
Disclosure
          As a result the following should be disclosed as likely or obviously relevant and as fruits of the investigation resulting in the charges that are set for trial:
