./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/on/ca/2023onca33.html
         The appellant was originally convicted of sexual assault on December 7, 2018. On April 30, 2019, he was sentenced to seven years imprisonment. He served his sentence until December 11, 2020, when this court allowed his appeal and ordered a new trial because the trial judge did not provide reasons for convicting him.
         On November 26, 2021, the appellant was convicted of sexual assault upon his re-trial. On March 16, 2022, the appellant was sentenced to seven years imprisonment, less five years credit for pre-sentence custody leaving a net sentence of two years. Pursuant to R. v. Summers, 2014 SCC 26, 1 SCR 575, the trial judge granted credit at a rate of 1:1 for the time the appellant spent in the federal penitentiary serving his sentence imposed by the first trial judge, and credit at the rate of 1.5:1 for the remaining pre-sentence custody. The trial judge rejected the appellant’s request that enhanced credit should be given for the time served in the federal penitentiary awaiting the hearing of his appeal because at that time, the appellant was not awaiting trial and had access to programs not available in provincial remand. 
         On appeal, the appellant raises two issues, the first of which is undisputed. Before the trial judge, all parties agreed to, and incorrectly calculated the appellant’s pre-sentence custody. Accordingly, the parties now agree that the appellant should have been given more Summers credit for pre-sentence custody and that this court should vary the sentence and reduce it by 81 days based on the 1.5:1 credit granted by the trial judge. 
         The second issue on appeal is whether the trial judge should have granted enhanced credit for the time the appellant spent in federal custody serving his first sentence. As noted above, the trial judge granted the appellant 1:1 credit for this time. 
         It is the appellant’s submission that enhanced credit was warranted for this time at a rate of 1.5:1. According to the appellant, the time spent in federal custody became akin to pre-trial custody once his appeal was successful, and the trial judge should have recognized that this time would not count towards the appellant’s parole and early release for the sentence he imposed. According to the appellant, the denial of enhanced credit in this case is unfair. 
         The Crown argues that the trial judge’s apportionment of enhanced credit is highly discretionary and ought not to be interfered with absent an error of law or principle. According to the Crown, in the circumstances of this case, the trial judge was not required to grant enhanced credit for time serving the sentence imposed by the first trial judge. Requiring him to do so would contradict the qualitative rationale of Summers credit for provincial custody, that is, to account for those detained in provincial institutions being unable to access education and programs available in federal institutions.
         We recognize that this court should not modify a sentence unless the sentence is unfit, or the sentencing judge made an error in principle that had an impact on the sentence: R. v. Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64, 3 SCR 1089, at paras. 41-44. 
         In our view, it was an error in principle for the trial judge to conclude that enhanced credit for serving that first sentence was not warranted simply because the appellant had access to federal programs. In the circumstances of this case, the trial judge should have also considered the fact that the appellant’s time served pending appeal would not count for the purposes of parole eligibility and statutory release and whether that loss worked unfairly: see e.g., R. v. Gunning, 2008 BCCA 22, 250 B.C.A.C. 243, at para. 9. In light of this error, we consider the issue of sentence afresh.
         The appellant was convicted by the first trial judge without providing reasons and successfully appealed on that basis. Had the appellant continued to serve his initial sentence, he would have been eligible for parole in March 2021 and eligible for statutory release in January 2023. Under the current sentence, he was eligible for parole in November 2022 and is eligible for statutory release in July 2023. The appellant will have spent more time in custody for the offence because of his successful appeal. We are of the view that to mitigate against that unfairness, the appellant should be credited at a rate of 1.5:1 for the time he served awaiting appeal. 
      For these reasons, the appeal is allowed. The parties agree that these errors would warrant additional credit of 368 days, and accordingly, the appellant is granted an additional credit of 368 days over the trial judge’s determination of five years credit. The net sentence imposed by the trial judge of two years is accordingly reduced to a net sentence of one year. All other aspects of the sentence including the ancillary orders stand. 
