./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/on/ca/2023onca20.html
         The appellant was found guilty of sexual assault of the complainant B.O. The appellant and the complainant were both 16 years old at the time of the offence. The appellant was sentenced to 180 days of secured custody, 90 days of community supervision and 18 months of probation.
         The appellant’s position at trial was that the sexual encounter was consensual or, in the alternative, that he had an honest but mistaken belief in consent. The appellant did not testify. On the complainant’s evidence, after engaging in some consensual kissing in the basement bedroom of the appellant’s house, the complainant engaged consensually in oral sex with the appellant. The appellant then proposed vaginal intercourse. The complainant declined, explaining that she was a virgin and she was not ready. Following the oral sex, the complainant was lying on her back on the bed. The appellant put his penis towards her as if to engage in vaginal intercourse. The complainant said “no, I don’t want to”, to which the appellant responded that was fine with him. Nevertheless, the appellant unsuccessfully attempted vaginal intercourse with her at least six times. At least four of those times, the complainant told him no, very clearly. The complainant started dressing and got up to leave. The appellant persuaded her to return to the bed and they engaged in kissing again.
         The appellant once again attempted to put his penis in the complainant’s vagina. She again said no and again explained that she was not ready to have intercourse. Nevertheless, the appellant continued to attempt vaginal intercourse. The complainant testified that at some point she stopped saying no because it was futile. She testified that her silence was not because she consented to what the appellant was doing. She did not.
         Despite vigorously and repeatedly thrusting his penis against the complainant’s vagina, the appellant was still unable to penetrate her. He relented, and instead began digitally penetrating her vagina with two or three of his fingers. She asked him what he was doing and he replied, “I just want to pop that cherry”.
         The complainant testified that although she did not consent to this, she was initially relieved that he had stopped trying to penetrate her with his penis. He continued aggressively and painfully, and she testified that it felt like he was punching her vagina. He then attempted to penetrate her with his penis again, before giving up and telling her to give him oral sex “until he could finish”. She did. She spent the rest of the night sleeping in the bed next to the appellant.
         Two days later, the complainant went to a clinic. The medical examination report noted vaginal abrasions and bruising. She experienced vaginal pain and bleeding over several days.
         The complainant reported the incident to police over a year later, after hearing a presentation at school given by the father of a sexual assault victim.
         The appellant raises three grounds of appeal: (1) unreasonable verdict; (2) error in the trial judge’s assessment of the defence of honest but mistaken belief in consent; and (3) misapprehension of the evidence.
         For the reasons that follow, we do not agree that the trial judge erred in any respect, and the appeal is dismissed.
      The basis of the unreasonable verdict argument is that the trial judge failed to adequately scrutinize the complainant’s evidence, and failed to grapple with contradictory evidence from two other teenagers who were present that evening, S.R. and T.N.
      S.R. and T.N. were Crown witnesses, and the trial judge found their evidence to be of marginal relevance. Both gave evidence of their observations about the affectionate nature of the interactions between the appellant and the complainant prior to events in the bedroom. S.R. also testified that the complainant requested that the appellant, who was going to sleep on the couch, sleep with her instead. Because neither S.R. nor T.N. witnessed any of the interactions that took place inside the bedroom, the trial judge found their evidence largely irrelevant.
      The appellant, however, argues that the evidence of S.R. and T.N. about interactions before the bedroom incident was contradictory to B.O.’s evidence, and that this difference gave reason to doubt B.O.’s credibility. The trial judge erred, the appellant argues, in finding B.O. to be a credible witness in light of contradictions with S.R. and T.N.’s evidence.
      This ground of appeal fails. The trial judge made no error in finding S.R.’s and T.N.’s evidence on peripheral matters unhelpful to resolving the central question: did the appellant commit a sexual assault against the complainant? The interactions between the two prior to the events in the bedroom were not probative. Second, the appellant overstates the differences between the testimony of the complainant and S.R. and T.N. None of the statements made by the latter two witnesses on which the appellant relies were put to the complainant in either examination in chief or cross-examination. The highest the appellant can put things is that the complainant testified she was “shy” around the appellant, but her behaviour preceding the bedroom encounter suggest this self-perception was inaccurate. The trial judge did not err in finding that this did not undermine her credibility. Third, the trial judge was alive to differences between the testimony of the complainant and the testimonies of S.R. and T.N. He found the complainant to be credible and reliable notwithstanding these differences on collateral matters. His findings of credibility are entitled to deference.
      With respect to the trial judge’s finding that there was no air of reality to the defence of honest but mistaken belief in consent, again, we see no error. There was no evidence that the appellant believed that the complainant was consenting to vaginal intercourse or digital penetration by the appellant, or that the appellant had made reasonable efforts to ascertain the complainant’s consent. This is determinative of this ground: R. v. Barton, 2019 SCC 33, 2 S.C.R. 579, at para. 121.
      The argument that the trial judge misapprehended the evidence and, specifically, that he disregarded the evidence of S.R. and T.N. on the basis that the evidence was inadmissible absent an application under s. 276 of the Criminal Code, R.S.C., 1985, c. C-46, does not withstand a careful reading of the reasons. The evidence was before the trial judge and he adverted to it, but he did not find it persuasive. There was no misapprehension.
      The appeal is dismissed.
