./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/ca/2023bcca29.html
        
The appellant appeals his conviction on charges of possession of cocaine and methamphetamine for the purpose of trafficking contrary to s. 5(2) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, S.C. 1996, c. 19.
        
In the course of executing a search warrant, police searched the appellant’s vehicle. Inside the trunk of the vehicle was a backpack containing a significant amount of cocaine and methamphetamine. The appellant was the owner and sole occupant of the vehicle. 
        
The only issue at trial was whether the Crown had proven beyond a reasonable doubt that the appellant had knowledge of the drugs. The trial judge found that the appellant’s guilt was the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the circumstantial evidence. 
        
The appellant says the trial judge erred in his approach to assessing circumstantial evidence. He seeks an order setting aside his conviction and directing a new trial. Factual Background
        
Between October 31 and November 23, 2017, the police conducted surveillance for drug activity on a residence and a storage facility in Abbotsford, B.C. The evidence at trial included CCTV footage from the storage facility. The main subject of the investigation, at least initially, was an individual named Brian MacDonald. Mr. MacDonald and his sons leased the storage locker that was a focus of the police surveillance (the “Locker”).
        
Two vehicles were observed on multiple occasions during the surveillance: a Lexus that was commonly driven by Mr. MacDonald, and a Nissan Altima owned by the appellant. In the course of the surveillance, the appellant was observed attending the residence and/or the storage facility on multiple occasions in either the Altima or the Lexus, accompanied by Mr. MacDonald or his son. The appellant and Mr. MacDonald were both observed carrying items to and from the storage facility, and accessing the Locker. 
        
The surveillance from November 8 captured Mr. MacDonald and his son in possession of a black backpack at the storage facility.
        
On two occasions—November 14 and 20, 2017—Mr. MacDonald was observed driving the appellant’s Altima alone to the storage facility. During his attendance at the storage facility, Mr. MacDonald was seen transporting items from the Altima into the Locker, and accessing the trunk of the Altima.
        
On November 22, 2017, the day before the appellant’s arrest, the Altima was observed parked in the driveway of the residence at 9:51 a.m. The Altima departed at 10:10 a.m. and returned at 10:41 a.m. When the Altima returned, the appellant was observed to be the driver and sole occupant. Later in the same day, Mr. MacDonald was observed driving the Lexus on three occasions: once he was alone, once he was with his son, and the third time he was leaving the residence with the appellant.
      November 23, 2017 was “takedown day”, which involved the execution of search warrants and arrests. Mr. MacDonald was arrested in the Lexus that afternoon. A team of officers attended the residence for the purpose of executing the search warrant. 
      The appellant arrived at the residence alone in the Altima at approximately 4:46 p.m. on November 23. He was arrested and searched incident to arrest. In his possession were keys to the Altima, a knife, his wallet, and a total of $910 in cash.
      Police officers also searched the Altima. The trunk of the vehicle was accessed with a fob that was attached to the keys found on the appellant at the time of his arrest. Inside the trunk there was a black backpack with the zipper closed. Quantities of methamphetamine and crack cocaine were found in the backpack. The cocaine had a value of between approximately $5,000 and $5,600 if sold in bulk, and about $10,000 if sold at the street level in .1 gram amounts. The methamphetamine had an approximate bulk value of between $13,000 and $16,000 and a value of $56,000 if sold at the street level in .1 gram amounts. 
      The appellant admitted at trial that the amount and value of the drugs seized from the Altima were consistent only with possession for the purpose of trafficking. The defence did not call evidence. The only live issue at trial was whether the Crown had proven beyond a reasonable doubt that the appellant had knowledge of the drugs, so as to establish that he had possession within the meaning of s. 4(3) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 [Code]. The Reasons for Judgment
      At the outset of his reasons, the trial judge noted that the Crown’s case was a circumstantial one: at para. 1. He cited R. v. Villaroman, 2016 SCC 33 [Villaroman] as the most recent statement of the law on circumstantial evidence. He quoted from para. 37 of Villaroman, which directs trial judges in assessing circumstantial evidence to consider “other reasonable possibilities” that are inconsistent with an accused’s guilt: at para. 2. The trial judge stated that he considered two other cases: R. v. To, 1992 CanLII 913 (BC CA), B.C.J. No. 1700 (C.A.) [To] and R. v. Chualna, 2003 BCCA 650.
     
The live issue at trial was stated by the trial judge as follows:
       The question raised in this circumstantial case is whether there are other reasonable possibilities from the evidence that the defendant did not have knowledge of the drugs in his vehicle. The defence says the drugs could have been concealed in the trunk by another person.
     
The defence argued at trial that it was evident from the surveillance evidence that the appellant did not have exclusive possession of the Altima, which gave rise to a plausible alternative explanation of the presence of drugs in the trunk; that is, that they were put there by someone else without the appellant’s knowledge. The trial judge stated:
     I do not disagree, having reviewed the evidence, that indeed [MacDonald] had used the vehicle on November 14th and 20th. From the CCTV a variety of items were being moved to and from the storage unit and other items were being moved about in the Altima from the trunk to the backseat. However, [while] this may establish some past permissive use of the Altima, it does not go further than that. It is not evidence which has created a plausible theory pointing to another alternative of possession and control on the offence date. Furthermore, it does not logically follow that there is a plausible alternate theory of possession and control given the three-day gap from [MacDonald’s] last use of the Altima until the arrest of the defendant. Throughout, I keep in mind the totality of the evidence.
      The trial judge did not accept the defence submission that the gaps in the evidence as to the whereabouts of the Altima before the appellant’s arrest raised a plausible alternative theory as to how drugs came to be in the trunk of the appellant’s vehicle. The trial judge also did not accept that the evidence established that the backpack seen in the surveillance video from November 8 was the same as the one seized from the trunk of the appellant’s Altima. In any event, he noted that the only evidence of Mr. MacDonald’s past possession of a backpack was from November 8. The trial judge considered the 15 days between November 8 and the date of the offence to be a “significant time gap”. He concluded that there was no basis to infer that Mr. MacDonald had the backpack with him when he was driving the appellant’s Altima on November 20.
      The trial judge noted, based on the surveillance evidence, the degree of “cooperative conduct” between the appellant and Mr. MacDonald. However, he did not conclude they were engaged in a joint venture: at para. 16.
     
The trial judge’s conclusions as to the appellant’s guilt are reflected in the following paragraphs:
     At arrest the defendant is driving a vehicle he owns. Access to the trunk was gained through the use of his key fob. In the trunk within a backpack is methamphetamine and cocaine with a value ranging from $18,000 to $66,000. These drugs have a very high value. Entrusting this valuable commodity to an unwitting person is unlikely. It does not logically follow that some third party would have placed them in the trunk without the knowledge of the defendant. Common sense says otherwise. The only obvious and logical inference from the totality of the evidence is that the defendant had knowledge of the presence of the drugs in the trunk of his vehicle. He certainly had control.
     The submissions by the defence are not plausible theories or reasonable possibilities which cast doubt on the Crown’s case. They do not amount to anything more than speculation and [do] not logically flow from the evidence presented by the Crown. 
      The trial judge therefore concluded that the Crown had proven the appellant’s guilt on the charged offences beyond a reasonable doubt. On Appeal
      The appellant argues that the trial judge misapplied the legal test for assessing circumstantial evidence from Villaroman. More specifically, in his factum on appeal the appellant alleges the trial judge erred in: 
(1)         
Reversing the burden of proof in his analysis of the circumstantial evidence; and (2)         
Failing to consider alternative inferences that were inconsistent with the appellant’s guilt, aside from theories suggested to him by the Crown and the defence.
      The appellant maintains that his appeal raises questions of law that are reviewable for correctness. He seeks a new trial pursuant to s. 686(1)(a)(ii) of the Code.
      The Crown says that the appellant’s arguments do not raise questions of law, but rather implicitly challenge the reasonableness of the trial judge’s conclusion. Thus, the only question on appeal is whether the guilty verdict was unreasonable and should be set aside pursuant to s. 686(1)(a)(i) of the Code.
      Where there is a challenge to the reasonableness of the verdict in a circumstantial case, the appellate court’s task is to determine whether the trial judge, acting judicially, could reasonably have been satisfied that the accused’s guilt was the only reasonable conclusion available on the totality of the evidence: Villaroman at para. 55. It is for the trier of fact to draw the line that separates reasonable doubt from speculation, and such an assessment can only be set aside on appeal where it is unreasonable: R. v. Mero, 2020 BCCA 331 at para. 48; Villaroman at para. 71.
      In assessing whether the appellant has established error by the trial judge, this Court must apply a functional and contextual approach to the reasons for judgment below. The reasons must be read as a whole and in the context of the record, the live issues at trial, and the positions taken by the parties: R. v. G.F., 2021 SCC 20 at para. 5. Discussion Circumstantial Evidence
     
Where the Crown relies on circumstantial evidence to prove the offence, the trier of fact must be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the guilt of the accused is the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence as a whole. If a reasonable inference other than the guilt of the accused may be drawn, then the Crown has not met its burden of proof beyond reasonable doubt: Villaroman at para. 35. The proper approach to assessing circumstantial evidence is set out as follows in Villaroman:
     When assessing circumstantial evidence, the trier of fact should consider “other plausible theor[ies]” and “other reasonable possibilities” which are inconsistent with guilt:  R. v. Comba, 1938 CanLII 14 (ON CA), O.R. 200 (C.A.), at pp. 205 and 211, per Middleton J.A., aff’d 1938 CanLII 7 (SCC), S.C.R. 396; R. v. Baigent, 2013 BCCA 28, 335 B.C.A.C. 11, at para. 20; R. v. Mitchell, QCA 394 (AustLII), at para. 35. I agree with the appellant that the Crown thus may need to negative these reasonable possibilities, but certainly does not need to “negative every possible conjecture, no matter how irrational or fanciful, which might be consistent with the innocence of the accused”: R. v. Bagshaw, 1971 CanLII 13 (SCC), S.C.R. 2, at p. 8. “Other plausible theories” or “other reasonable possibilities” must be based on logic and experience applied to the evidence or the absence of evidence, not on speculation.
     Of course, the line between a “plausible theory” and “speculation” is not always easy to draw. But the basic question is whether the circumstantial evidence, viewed logically and in light of human experience, is reasonably capable of supporting an inference other than that the accused is guilty.
      Villaroman also makes clear that a reasonable inference that is inconsistent with guilt may arise from the evidence, or the absence of evidence: at para. 36. 
Alleged Error 1: Did the Trial Judge Err in Reversing the Burden of Proof? Appellant’s Position
      The appellant argues that there are four passages in the reasons for judgment that reflect error in the trial judge’s approach to circumstantial evidence: (1)         
At para. 12, the trial judge states that a plausible alternative theory of possession does not arise from Mr. MacDonald’s prior use of the Altima given the “three-day gap” between Mr. MacDonald’s last known use of the vehicle on November 20 and the appellant’s arrest on November 23. The appellant says that the trial judge’s analysis implies that the defence had the burden to fill the evidentiary gap in order to lend more plausibility to the theory that someone else had put the drugs in the trunk of the Altima without his knowledge; (2)         
At para. 13, the trial judge rejects the defence argument that gaps in the evidence of the whereabouts of the Altima give rise to the “plausible alternative theory as to how the drugs came to be in the defendant’s vehicle”. The judge characterizes the argument as “conjecture amounting to speculation”. The appellant says this reflects a reversal of the burden of proof because it implies a “default theory” that the appellant placed the drugs in the trunk of the Altima, which the defence was obliged to counter; (3)         
At para. 14, the trial judge states that the evidence does not establish that the backpack seen in the CCTV footage of the storage facility on November 8 is the same as the backpack found in the trunk of the Altima. The appellant says this amounts to a reversal of the burden of proof because the judge placed the onus on the defence to prove it was the same backpack rather considering whether such a possibility could be “safely ruled out”; and (4)         
At para. 15, the trial judge highlighted the “significant time gap” between Mr. MacDonald’s possession of a black backpack and the arrest of the appellant. The appellant says this implies that the defence had the burden to fill the gap in the evidence.
     
The appellant generally argues that the trial judgment reflects the judge’s misconception about the defence’s submissions on gaps in the evidence, which were directed at pointing out shortcomings in the Crown’s case by demonstrating that the Crown had not met its burden. Analysis
      In assessing the appellant’s arguments, it is important to begin with an understanding of the trial judge’s basis for concluding that the Crown had proven its case beyond reasonable doubt. The reasons for judgment reflect that the trial judge correctly self-instructed that he had to consider whether the evidence, or absence of evidence, gave rise to reasonable possibilities that were inconsistent with guilt. He was clearly aware that the Altima was not under round-the-clock police surveillance leading up to the appellant’s arrest. The evidence as to the use of the Altima was addressed in the parties’ final submissions. The defence argued that the gaps in the evidence strengthened the alternative inference that someone else had placed the drugs in the trunk of the Altima. The Crown argued that gaps in the evidence about the prior use of the Altima did not impact the Crown’s case, which was based on evidence implicating the appellant as of the offence date.
      The trial judge found that the appellant’s knowledge of the drugs at the time of the offence was proven beyond a reasonable doubt based on evidence of the appellant’s control and ownership of the Altima at the time of the offence, the appellant’s possession of a fob that opened the trunk, the high commercial value of the drugs, and the implausibility of a third party entrusting drugs of such quantity and value to someone with no knowledge of them. In reaching his conclusion, the trial judge considered and rejected the defence submission that the evidence, and absence of evidence, of the use of the Altima gave rise to any reasonable inference that was inconsistent with the appellant’s guilt. 
      The appellant’s criticism of the trial judge’s reference to the three-day gap between the last observation of Mr. MacDonald using the Altima and the offence date must be viewed in this context. The three-day gap was relevant to the trial judge’s analysis because he found it weakened the alternative inference advanced by the defence that Mr. MacDonald was responsible for the drugs being in the appellant’s vehicle on the offence date. The reasons for judgment do not indicate, either expressly or impliedly, that the trial judge imposed an evidentiary burden on the appellant to prove that Mr. MacDonald had access to the Altima between November 20 and November 23. Instead, in determining whether the totality of the evidence proved the appellant’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, he considered both the evidence and the absence of evidence in order to assess the cogency of the Crown’s case and the plausibility of the alternative inference advanced by the defence. This is the process envisioned by Villaroman. Other reasonable possible inferences “… must be based on logic and experience applied to the evidence or the absence of evidence”: Villaroman at para. 37.
      In his oral submissions on appeal, the appellant resiled somewhat from the position that the trial judge’s reference to the three-day gap amounted to a reversal of the burden of proof. Instead he suggests, as I understand his submission, that the trial judge erred in only considering whether the gaps in evidence about the prior use of the Altima undermined the defence case and not considering whether the gaps undermined the Crown’s case. For the reasons I have already stated, I do not consider this argument to be supported by a contextual reading of the reasons for judgment. The time that elapsed between Mr. MacDonald’s last known use of the Altima and the offence date had limited relevance to the Crown’s theory, which was based on evidence implicating the appellant as of the offence date. However, it was directly relevant to the strength of the alternative inference suggested by the defence that Mr. MacDonald had placed the drugs in the Altima without the appellant’s knowledge. The trial judge’s reasons are responsive to the arguments that were made to him by the parties. There is no indication that the trial judge failed to consider gaps in the evidence about the use of the Altima in assessing the Crown’s case. Rather, he drew an inference of knowledge based on the totality of the evidence.
     
I also see no merit in the appellant’s argument that paragraph 13 of the reasons for judgment indicates that the trial judge required the appellant to rebut the judge’s “default theory” that the appellant placed the drugs in the trunk of the Altima. Again, this mischaracterizes the basis for the trial judge’s finding that the offence had been proved beyond a reasonable doubt. It also ignores the context of paragraph 13, which is that the trial judge was addressing the defence’s argument. In final submissions at trial, defence counsel argued (Transcript, p. 118): Essentially, though, what we have here is a significant gap in the evidence with regards to how the drugs came to be in the trunk, or even in that backpack. … There’s no evidence of who placed that in the trunk, and there’s no evidence as to who placed the drugs in the backpack. And certainly it’s possible that the backpack may have been in the trunk and then the drugs were placed there at some later point, too.
      This submission was consistent with the defence theory that Mr. MacDonald, or some other third party, had put the drugs in the trunk of the Altima without the appellant’s knowledge. That theory required the trial judge to comment on the identity of the individual who placed the drugs in the trunk of the vehicle. The Crown theory did not depend on a finding that the appellant placed the drugs in the trunk of the vehicle, and the trial judge made no finding on this point. Such a finding was not required in order to find the appellant guilty. Regardless of the manner by which the drugs were placed in the vehicle, the trial judge found that the circumstantial evidence established that the appellant had knowledge of the drugs as of the offence date. The trial judge did not assume a “default theory” that the appellant had put the drugs in the vehicle.
      Finally, I see no reversible error in the trial judge’s treatment of the backpack evidence. The appellant relied on this evidence in support of the alternative inference that Mr. MacDonald had placed the drugs in the appellant’s vehicle without his knowledge. The appellant urged the trial judge to find that the backpacks were the same. The trial judge found that the evidence did not establish that they were. The trial judge’s factual finding does not amount to legal error. Villaroman does not displace the usual fact-finding role of a trial judge. The trier of fact in a circumstantial case is not required to assume all facts asserted by the defence are true unless they “can safely be ruled out”, as the appellant argues. Rather, Villaroman directs that the trier of fact must consider the evidence as a whole and determine whether it gives rise to reasonable inferences that are inconsistent with guilt. The appellant’s guilt in this case did not turn on whether the backpack was the same. The trial judge did not state, expressly or impliedly, that there was any burden on the defence to adduce evidence to show the backpacks were the same in order to raise a reasonable doubt.
      The trial judge also did not suggest that the appellant was obliged to call further evidence to address the 15-day gap between the CCTV footage of Mr. MacDonald with the backpack and the offence date. There is no suggestion in the judgment that the appellant had an evidentiary burden to fill the 15-day gap.
      In sum, the trial judge’s analysis was responsive to the arguments advanced by the appellant at trial, and he correctly stated and applied the law on the criminal standard of proof in circumstantial cases. The trial judge did not reverse the burden of proof, or otherwise apply uneven treatment to the evidence.
      For these reasons I would not accede to this ground of appeal. Alleged Error 2: Did the Trial Judge Err in Failing to Consider Alternative Inferences Not Proposed by the Parties? 
      The second error alleged by the appellant is that the trial judge failed to consider plausible alternative inferences to the appellant’s guilt other than those proposed by the parties. In particular, the appellant says the trial judge ought to have expressly considered the possibility that a third party, perhaps Mr. MacDonald, left the drugs in the trunk of the Altima accidentally or negligently rather than by deliberate design, and then forgot about them. The appellant says the possibility that a third party may have accidentally left the drugs in the vehicle undermines the trial judge’s analysis, which is focussed on the implausibility of a third party entrusting such a valuable quantity of drugs to someone with no knowledge of the drugs. 
      As a related point, the appellant argues that the trial judge was likely misled by the judgment of this Court in To, which is one of the cases he noted in his judgment. The appellant emphasizes the material factual differences between the circumstances of To and the present case. Of particular note, in To the accused testified that he had been entrusted with the drugs without being told what they were, and there was evidence of the accused placing the drugs in a vehicle. In the present case, the appellant did not testify, and there is no evidence as to how the drugs got into the trunk of the Altima. The appellant therefore says that in this case, unlike To, there were alternative inferences that could be drawn other than the appellant being entrusted with the drugs.
      I am not persuaded by the appellant’s argument. The trial judge considered the totality of the evidence and concluded that the only reasonable inference that could be drawn was that the appellant had knowledge and control of the drugs. The trial judge did not expressly address the alternative possibility that the appellant now advances for the first on the appeal. However, he was not required to. While the trial judge did have to consider all reasonable possibilities inconsistent with the appellant’s guilt, he was not required to consider alternatives based on conjecture and speculation. The theory that Mr. MacDonald, or someone else, may have negligently left a significant quantity of valuable drugs in the trunk of the Altima and then forgot about them is no less speculative than the theory that the drugs were deliberately entrusted to the appellant without his knowledge.
      There is also no indication in the trial judge’s reasons that he treated the judgment in To as if the facts were indistinguishable. To was a relevant authority, and the trial judge made only passing reference to it. The trial judge’s conclusions were based on the evidence in this case, assessed within the framework set out in Villaroman.
      As Villaroman instructs, the role of this Court on appeal is to determine whether the trial judge’s conclusion was reasonable in light of the totality of the evidence, not to focus on hypothetical alternatives theories: at paras. 65 and 69. The trial judge’s reasons, read functionally and contextually, demonstrate that he properly stated and applied the law. The verdict is one that a properly instructed trier of fact, acting judicially, could reasonably have rendered. Disposition
     
I would dismiss the appeal.
