./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/ca/2023bcca37.html
        
Kyle Steven Zsombor appeals his conviction by Justice Hori of the Supreme Court of British Columbia, on a charge of committing aggravated assault against Joseph Gates.  As the trial judge stated at the opening of his reasons for judgment, the circumstances of this case are “tragic”.
        
Mr. Zsombor and Mr. Gates were long-time friends.  The incident occurred after they had been out drinking with other friends.  An argument between the two of them ended when Mr. Zsombor punched Mr. Gates in the head, causing him to fall and strike his head on the ground.  This resulted in Mr. Gates suffering a significant brain injury, which led to ongoing cognitive impairment and physical symptoms.  The incident was recorded by a video surveillance camera.
        
Mr. Zsombor asserted he acted in self-defence.  The trial judge found otherwise.  On appeal Mr. Zsombor argues the judge erred in multiple respects in rejecting that defence, including by not addressing consent, a matter that had not been put in issue.
        
For the reasons that follow, I would dismiss this appeal. Factual Background
        
On April 4, 2018, Mr. Zsombor invited Mr. Gates to his house to get together with a group of long-time friends, namely Trent Kitsch, Brett Phillips, Quinn Best, and Doug Hartel.  They arrived at Mr. Zsombor’s house at approximately 7 p.m. and stayed until about 10:30 p.m.  During that time, they were drinking beer; some may have consumed Korean rice wine and smoked marihuana.  The group then moved to the Doja Café, which was then owned by Mr. Kitsch, where they drank more beer.
        
At about 11:45 p.m. Mr. Zsombor went to the bathroom.  The others left the café without him to get something to eat.  A short time later, Mr. Zsombor went to look for them.
        
It is convenient to note here that the Crown called Mr. Gates, Mr. Kitsch, and Maria Kitsch, Mr. Kitsch’s spouse, as witnesses.  Ms. Kitsch was not present when the altercation occurred.  Mr. Zsombor was the only defence witness.  The trial judge had concerns about the reliability of the evidence given by all of the witnesses except Ms. Kitsch, because of the amount of alcohol they had consumed.  In particular, the judge found Mr. Gates’s and Mr. Zsombor’s recollections of what occurred to be neither reliable nor credible, both due to the effects of alcohol and because their evidence was coloured by self-interest. 
On the other hand, he found Mr. Kitsch’s evidence to be credible.
        
Mr. Zsombor met up with the others.  After Mr. Best and Mr. Philips had left, Mr. Zsombor, Mr. Kitsch, Mr. Gates, and Mr. Hartel returned to the café and then went into the alley behind it.  Mr. Zsombor was mad at them for having left without him.  Mr. Gates tried to calm Mr. Zsombor down and, in the course of doing so, pushed Mr. Zsombor several times.  As the judge set out in his reasons (at para. 21), the following is depicted in the video recorded by the café’s surveillance camera: •        
Mr. Kitsch, Mr. Hartel, Mr. Gates and Mr. Zsombor are standing in the area behind the [Doja] Cafe with Mr. Kitsch and Mr. Hartel positioned between Mr. Zsombor in the alley; •        
Mr. Zsombor is holding a case of beer in his left hand and his right arm is inside his coat sleeve; •        
Mr. Gates is gesturing with his right hand and holding a beer in his left hand; •        
Mr. Gates initially puts his right hand on Mr. Zsombor’s left shoulder, but soon thereafter, he pushes Mr. Zsombor in the chest area with his right hand and both parties move apart from each other; •        
Mr. Gates then makes a downward gesture with his right hand and Mr. Zsombor moves towards Mr. Gates; •        
Mr. Gates then pushes Mr. Zsombor in the chest area for a second time and Mr. Zsombor is pushed backwards; •        
When Mr. Zsombor moves forward again, Mr. Gates pushes Mr. Zsombor for a third time, but this time in the area of his left arm and Mr. Zsombor is pushed backwards again; •        
Mr. Gates then makes a downward motion with his right hand; •        
Mr. Gates then pushes Mr. Zsombor for a fourth time in the chest area and then drops his right hand to waist level again gesturing downward; •        
Mr. Zsombor draws his right hand backwards and then steps forward with a striking motion using his right hand and striking Mr. Gates in the head area; •        
Mr. Gates’ head snaps backward and Mr. Gates falls backward to the ground; •        
Mr. Zsombor takes two or three steps forward and goes down on top of Mr. Gates.
        
As described by Mr. Kitsch, Mr. Zsombor attempted to continue fighting with Mr. Gates, but stopped immediately when he realized Mr. Gates had been knocked out and was injured. Relevant Statutory Provisions
     
Section 268(1) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, provides: Every one commits an aggravated assault who wounds, maims, disfigures or endangers the life of the complainant.
     
Self-defence is governed by s. 34 of the Criminal Code: (1)     A person is not guilty of an offence if (a)     they believe on reasonable grounds that force is being used against them or another person or that a threat of force is being made against them or another person; (b)     the act that constitutes the offence is committed for the purpose of defending or protecting themselves or the other person from that use or threat of force; and (c)     the act committed is reasonable in the circumstances. (2)     In determining whether the act committed is reasonable in the circumstances, the court shall consider the relevant circumstances of the person, the other parties and the act, including, but not limited to, the following factors: (a)     the nature of the force or threat; (b)     the extent to which the use of force was imminent and whether there were other means available to respond to the potential use of force; (c)     the person’s role in the incident; (d)     whether any party to the incident used or threatened to use a weapon; (e)     the size, age, gender and physical capabilities of the parties to the incident; (f)       the nature, duration and history of any relationship between the parties to the incident, including any prior use or threat of force and the nature of that force or threat; (f.1)   any history of interaction or communication between the parties to the incident; (g)     the nature and proportionality of the person’s response to the use or threat of force; and (h)     whether the act committed was in response to a use or threat of force that the person knew was lawful.
      In R. v. Khill, 2021 SCC 37 at para. 51, 409 C.C.C. (3d) 141, the Court conceptualized the three elements in s. 34(1) as: (i) the catalyst; (ii) the motive; and (iii) the response. Defence Counsel’s Closing Submissions
      Mr. Zsombor’s counsel (who is not counsel on this appeal), began by stating that the issue in the case was “very focused” and ultimately would come down to s. 34(1)(c) of the Criminal Code, namely, whether Mr. Zsombor’s act in punching Mr. Gates was reasonable in the circumstances; he later referred to the application of s. 34(1)(c) as the “critical issue in the case.”  Counsel urged the trial judge to find that Mr. Zsombor punched Mr. Gates in self-defence, to stop Mr. Gates from continuing to push him.  He addressed some of the factors listed in s. 34(2).
      Counsel also submitted that if self-defence did not apply, then the issues would be whether Mr. Zsombor’s conduct was “reflexive” or “instinctual in nature” and whether the Crown had proven the mens rea of aggravated assault, i.e., whether, in the circumstances, a reasonable person in Mr. Zsombor’s circumstances would have realized that punching Mr. Gates in the head would subject Mr. Gates to the risk of bodily harm. Crown Counsel’s Closing Submissions
      Crown counsel conceded Mr. Gates had applied force to Mr. Zsombor (s. 34(1)(a)) but submitted Mr. Zsombor’s response had been neither for a defence purpose (s. 34(1)(b)), nor reasonable in the circumstances (s. 34(1)(c)).  He submitted Mr. Zsombor acted out of anger and not for the purpose of defending himself.  With reference to some of the factors in s. 34(2), counsel submitted Mr. Zsombor’s response to being pushed was unreasonable.  He further submitted the punch thrown by Mr. Zsombor was a voluntary act, not a reflexive one. Trial Judge’s Reasons
      The trial judge began by summarizing the evidence and setting out his findings with respect to the reliability and credibility of the witnesses. 
He then addressed the issues that had been raised by counsel under the headings “Aggravated Assault” and “Self-Defence”
     
With reference to R. v. Farrar, 2019 NSSC 46 at para. 32, and R. v. Fontaine, 2011 BCCA 140 at para. 25, 274 C.C.C. (3d) 474, the judge set out the elements of aggravated assault as follows (at para. 34): (a)     the accused intentionally applied force to the complainant; (b)     the complainant did not consent to the force the accused intentionally applied; (c)     the accused knew that the complainant did not consent to the force being applied; (d)     the force applied wounded, maimed, disfigured or endangered the complainant's life; and (e)     a reasonable person, in the circumstances, would realize that the force applied would put the complainant at risk of suffering some kind of bodily harm, although not necessarily serious bodily harm or the precise kind of harm that the complainant suffered. He went on to find that the Crown had proven each of them beyond a reasonable doubt.
      The judge dismissed Mr. Zsombor’s argument that his conduct was reflexive, finding that, as Mr. Zsombor struck Mr. Gates only after he had been pushed by him four times, Mr. Zsombor could not have been taken by surprise by Mr. Gates.
     
The judge then addressed Mr. Zsombor’s argument that he had acted in self-defence.  Referring to R. v. Tremblay, 2019 BCSC 410, a decision cited by Mr. Zsombor’s counsel, the judge summarized the legal principles applicable to self-defence (at para. 51): a)    The Crown bears the burden of disproving the defence of self-defence. To meet this burden, it need only prove beyond a reasonable doubt that one of the three elements of the defence does not apply.  All three of the s. 34(1) criteria must be present for the defence to be available: [Tremblay] para. 172. b)    In deciding whether the Crown has met its burden, the [court] must consider the whole of the evidence and, throughout the analysis, the court must remain mindful of the fact that the accused is presumed innocent unless and until the Crown meets its burden of proof: para. 173. c)    The law does not require that an accused retreat before acting in self-defence, although a failure to do so may be relevant to the s. 34(1) and (2) analysis: para. 174. d)    A person who is under attack and defending themselves cannot be expected to weigh to a nicety the exact measure of the defensive action required: para. 174. e)    In self-defence cases, evidence showing that the complainant has a predisposition to violence is admissible: para. 175.
      The judge proceeded to consider self-defence, noting firstly that the Crown had conceded that: (i) there was an air of reality to that defence; and (ii) the element set out in s. 34(1)(a), i.e., whether Mr. Zsombor believed Mr. Gates was using force against him, was satisfied.
     
With respect to s. 34(1)(b), the judge was satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the punch Mr. Zsombor threw had not been for a defensive or protective purpose.  The judge referred to the evidence of Mr. Kitsch that: (i) Mr. Zsombor had been “very mad”; (ii) Mr. Gates had been trying to calm Mr. Zsombor down; and (iii) when Mr. Gates fell backward to the ground, Mr. Zsombor initially sought to continue the fight, until he realized Mr. Gates was injured. 
The judge specifically rejected Mr. Zsombor’s evidence that he merely “swatted” Mr. Gates to stop Mr. Gates from pushing him.  In concluding his discussion of this element, the judge stated:
     In this case, I do not accept the evidence of Mr. Zsombor and, based on the evidence of Mr. Kitsch and the video surveillance recording, I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Zsombor punched Mr. Gates and, when he did so, it was not for a defensive or protective purpose, but to engage Mr. Gates in a fight.  When Mr. Zsombor punched Mr. Gates, the video shows that Mr. Gates had his arms and hands lowered.  The video also shows Mr. Zsombor take two or three steps before he drops to the ground on top of Mr. Gates.  According to Mr. Kitsch, Mr. Zsombor appeared to drop on top of Mr. Gates to continue the fight. 
     I see nothing in the conduct of Mr. Zsombor that is defensive or protective.  On the contrary, Mr. Zsombor’s action in punching Mr. Gates is an offensive action.  He was intending, as indicated by Mr. Kitsch, to engage Mr. Gates in a fight.  While I recognize in some situations a strong offence is the best defence, in the circumstances of this confrontation between childhood friends, it was not necessary to take such an offensive approach.  Accordingly, the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that the second element of self-defence is not satisfied. 
     Therefore, the defence of self-defence is not available to Mr. Zsombor.
     
The judge stated that the Crown needed only to prove that one of the three elements of self-defence did not apply.  Nevertheless, he went on to assess the element set out in s. 34(1)(c), i.e., whether Mr. Zsombor’s action were reasonable in the circumstances.  After noting that: (i) the force applied by Mr. Gates was relatively minor; (ii) Mr. Zsombor and Mr. Gates were long-time friends who knew each other well; (iii) there had never been a physical confrontation between them; (iv)  Mr. Zsombor was very mad and Mr. Gates was only attempting to calm him down; and (v) Mr. Zsombor was heavier than Mr. Gates but both were athletic and active persons, the judge stated:
     I must not judge the reasonableness of Mr. Zsombor's action by the serious nature of the injuries suffered by Mr. Gates.  I also recognize that Mr. Zsombor is not required to measure to a nicety his response.  However, given the nature of the force applied to Mr. Zsombor and the longstanding friendship between Mr. Zsombor and Mr. Gates, the reaction of Mr. Zsombor in throwing the punch to the area of Mr. Gates’ head was not reasonable.  Longstanding close friends who have not had any physical confrontation would not react in that way.
     Therefore, I find that the third element of self-defence is not satisfied. Grounds of Appeal
     
In his factum, Mr. Zsombor states his ground of appeal as follows: ISSUE 1: The trial judge erred in his application of s. 34(1) of the Criminal Code by: conflating the second and third element of the test for self-defence; by concluding that Mr. Zsombor’s actions were offensive thereby not for a defensive or protective purpose; glossing over the events which precipitated the act; and failing to acknowledge that a state of anger can coexist with a defensive or protective purpose. ISSUE 2: The trial judge erred in failing to consider the defence of consent. Analysis Issue 1: Self-Defence
     
Mr. Zsombor contends the trial judge’s reasons for rejecting self-defence are flawed in multiple respects.  I will say now that at their core, his arguments are an attempt to have us retry the case and reach a different conclusion on the evidence than that reached by the judge. 
This is reflected in the fact that the primary relief he seeks is an acquittal, which here we could only grant if we reweighed the evidence.  That, however, is not our function.  Apposite is the following from the judgment of Chief Justice Culliton in R. v. Andres, 1979 CanLII 2238 (SK CA), 2 W.W.R. 249 at 251 (Sask. C.A.): The Court of Appeal cannot and should not set aside a conviction merely because it would have taken a different view of the evidence than did the trial judge.  The Court of Appeal must remember that it is neither its duty nor its function to re-try cases — its function is one of review.
     
The first argument is that the judge conflated the second and third elements of self-defence—motive and response—by considering whether Mr. Zsombor’s actions were necessary, instead of focusing on his subjective state of mind.  This argument relates the judge’s statement in para. 60 of his reasons that “it was not necessary [for Mr. Zsombor] to take such an offensive approach”.  However, this statement cannot be read in isolation.  Not only was the judge provided with case law and submissions with respect to the motive element requiring a subjective analysis, more importantly, it is clear from his reasons that he engaged in such an analysis.  The judge commenced his discussion of this element as follows:
     The second element of self-defence requires that the act constituting the offence be for defensive or protective purposes.  In this case, the question is whether Mr. Zsombor struck Mr. Gates in order to defend or protect himself.  In assessing the second element of the offence, I am mindful that Mr. Zsombor is not required to retreat before acting in self-defence and that he is not required to weigh the exact measure of his defensive response.  However, the response to the application of force must be defensive or protective in nature. …
     I see nothing in the conduct of Mr. Zsombor that is defensive or protective. On the contrary, Mr. Zsombor's action in punching Mr. Gates is an offensive action. He was intending, as indicated by Mr. Kitsch, to engage Mr. Gates in a fight. [Emphasis added.]
      Next, also in relation to para. 60 of the judge’s reasons, Mr. Zsombor contends the conclusion his actions were offensive, rather than defensive or protective, was irrational.  He says the distinction between offensive and defensive conduct is “unhelpful” because self-defence is premised on an accused having committed an act rather than standing by passively.  Similarly, he argues that the judge “unduly limited the scope of self-defence … by implicitly concluding that fighting back, acting offensively, within seconds of being pushed four times, could not be for a defensive or protective purpose.”
      These arguments are grounded in a parsing of the judge’s reasons. 
When those reasons are read as a whole, it is clear that the judge used the words “offensive action” as another way of expressing the conclusion regarding Mr. Zsombor’s subjective state of mind that he had already reached in para. 59, namely, that Mr. Zsombor’s purpose was to engage Mr. Gates in a fight.  Further, the judge did not limit the scope of self-defence by concluding that “fighting back” could not be for a defensive or protective purpose; indeed, he noted in para. 60 that “in some situations a strong offence is the best defence.”  What he concluded is that this did not happen in this case.
      Next, in relation to para. 60, Mr. Zsombor contends the judge’s statement that he saw “nothing in the conduct of Mr. Zsombor that is defensive or protective” is “completely unreasonable” given that Mr. Gates pushed Mr. Zsombor four times before the punch was thrown.  Mr. Zsombor says that it is hard to understand how intending to engage in a fight after being pushed precludes having a defensive or protective purpose.  Once again, this argument is grounded in a parsing of the reasons.
      I accept that an accused’s purposes may be layered, in that they may act for a defensive purpose in addition to another purpose.  However, for the defence of self-defence to succeed, the accused must have acted for a defensive or protective purpose, regardless of what other purposes may have co-existed. 
Here the judge found no protective or defensive purpose.  That finding was open to him on the facts.
      Next, Mr. Zsombor submits that in finding Mr. Gates attempted to calm him down, the judge misapprehended Mr. Kitsch’s evidence. He says this is incorrect because while Mr. Kitsch testified Mr. Gates was attempting to calm Mr. Zsombor down, he also testified both had their voices raised to same level and that Mr. Gates was aggressive.  Of note is that in cross-examination, Mr. Kitsch stated that what he meant by aggressive was Mr. Gates pushing Mr. Zsombor.  I would not give effect to this argument; it is no more than a disagreement with the judge’s interpretation of the evidence, which included the video recording: see R. v. Swales, 2014 BCCA 350 at para. 49, 360 B.C.A.C. 291.
      Mr. Zsombor’s remaining submissions are with respect to s. 34(1)(c); i.e., whether his response was reasonable.  He submits the judge’s analysis of his conduct was “unduly narrowed and impermissibly circumscribed” and that “[l]ooking at the incident, globally and holistically, it [was] wholly unreasonable to conclude that [his response to Mr. Gates’s actions] … was unreasonable.”  However, Mr. Zsombor has failed to identify any palpable and overring errors in the judge’s fact finding or inference drawing, any misapprehension of evidence, or any misapplication of legal principles.  Rather, what he seeks is to have this Court reweigh the evidence and retry the case.  That, as mentioned above, is not something this Court can do.
      I would not accede to the first ground of appeal. Issue 2: Consent
     
Mr. Zsombor submits the trial judge erred in failing to consider whether the Crown had proven Mr. Gates had not consented to engaging in a fist fight and, therefore, whether the punch Mr. Zsombor threw amounted to an assault.  This argument rests on s. 265 of the Criminal Code, which states: (1)      
A person commits an assault when (a)      
Without the consent of another person, he applies force intentionally to that other person directly or indirectly; …
(2)      
This section applies to all forms of assault, including sexual assault, sexual assault with a weapon, threats to a third party or causing bodily harm and aggravated sexual assault. [Emphasis added.] As discussed in R. v. Jobidon, 1991 CanLII 77 (SCC), [1991] 2 S.C.R. 714 at 766–768, and R. v. Paice, 2005 SCC 22 at paras. 10–14, [2005] 1 S.C.R. 229, in the context of a fist fight between adults, the defence of consent applies except for blows that are intended to and do cause serious hurt or non-trivial bodily harm.  Consent is also vitiated when one party employs tactics that change the nature of the consensual fight from an activity with some risk of serious bodily harm to one with a significant risk of such harm; i.e., tactics that were not reasonably contemplated in the first instance: R. v. Sullivan, 2011 NLCA 6 at paras. 34–38, 270 C.C.C. (3d) 93.
      Mr. Zsombor did not raise Mr. Gates’s consent as an issue at the trial.  Indeed, the word “consent” appears only once in the transcript when Mr. Zsombor’s counsel, in advancing self-defence, stated a person has the right to defend themself against an assault to which they did not consent.
     
The judge referred to “consent” in addressing the five elements of aggravated assault:
     On the issue of consent, there is no dispute.  I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Gates did not consent to being struck by Mr. Zsombor. 
I am also satisfied that Mr. Zsombor knew that there was no consent from Mr. Gates.
      Mr. Zsombor’s initial position, as set out in his factum and advanced at the hearing of this appeal, was that because of the way the case was presented, the judge conducted no analysis of consent in addressing either the elements of aggravated assault or the elements of self-defence.  He says the above-quoted statement was the product of the judge having treated the failure of defence counsel to address consent as a concession that a lack of consent had been established.  He further argued that even though the issue of consent was not raised, the judge was obligated to consider it.  We did not find it necessary to call on the Crown to respond to those arguments.
      In his reply submissions, Mr. Zsombor again addressed consent, advancing what was described as “a better presented argument”.  Accepting that the judge had found Mr. Gates did not consent to being punched, Mr. Zsombor submitted that once the judge found his motive was to engage Mr. Gates in a fight (see para. 59), the judge had to go back and reconsider whether there was a doubt about Mr. Gates’s lack of consent.
      To begin, I do not accept Mr. Zsombor’s argument that the judge failed to consider consent.  The judge was aware that absence of consent was an element of aggravated assault the Crown was required to prove beyond a reasonable doubt, listing it at para. 34 as among the elements of the offence.  His statement that there was “no dispute” in regard to consent reflects the fact that Mr. Zsombor’s counsel did not suggest Mr. Gates’s consent was an issue when he addressed the elements of aggravated assault.  There is no reason to doubt the veracity of this statement.  Nevertheless, the judge did address all of those elements.  In light of counsel’s submissions, the brevity of that portion of his reasons is not surprising.  However, even if it could be said the judge’s treatment of consent rested solely on the fact consent had not been put in issue—i.e., that he did not turn his mind to an analysis of the evidence to determine whether the Crown had met its burden—I would not accede to Mr. Zsombor’s argument.
      Mr. Zsombor submits a trial judge has a duty to consider all available defences regardless of whether they are raised by defence counsel. 
In his factum, he says “[t]he failure of counsel to meaningfully address the issue of consent did not relieve the trial judge of his obligation to do so.” 
I not do accept the judge had that obligation.
     
Mr. Zsombor relies on the following from Justice Major’s judgment in R. v. Ewanchuk, 1999 CanLII 711 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 330: 55        The trial judge explicitly chose not to consider whether the accused had the defence of honest but mistaken belief in consent, and concluded that the defence was probably not available unless the accused testified.  This conclusion ignores the right of the accused to have this defence considered solely on the Crown’s case.  The trial judge paid only passing interest to this defence undoubtedly because he had concluded that the defence of implied consent exonerated the accused.  The accused is entitled to have all available defences founded on a proper basis considered by the court, whether he raises them or not: see R. v. Bulmer, 1987 CanLII 56 (SCC), [1987] 1 S.C.R. 782, at p. 789. [Emphasis added.] In my view, this passage does not support the proposition that a trial judge, sitting without a jury, is obligated to address issues that counsel have not raised.
      The context in which the above-quoted passage was written is important.  In acquitting Mr. Ewanchuk of sexual assault, the trial judge relied on the defence of implied consent, a defence that does not exist in law. 
The judge rejected the defence of honest but mistaken belief in consent—which does exist —because Mr. Ewanchuk had not testified.  The Court of Appeal for Alberta affirmed the acquittal.  On further appeal, the Supreme Court of Canada entered a conviction.  In so doing, it held the judge had erred in the manner in which he dealt with the defence of honest but mistake belief.  In other words, Ewanchuk is not a case in which a trial judge failed to consider a defence at all, but one in which only passing reference was made to a defence that does exist in favour of considering one that does not.
     
The other aspect of Ewanchuk of note is that the authority cited by Major J., R. v. Bulmer, 1987 CanLII 56 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 782, deals with the obligations of a trial judge sitting with a jury.  In that case, Justice McIntyre stated (at 789): It is well settled law that in his charge the trial judge must put to the jury all defences that may arise upon the evidence, whether they have been raised by counsel for the defence or not.  In doing so, he is obliged to explain the law respecting the defence and to refer the jury to the evidence which may be relevant on that issue. 
Before putting the defence, however, the trial judge must decide whether in the facts before him the defence arises on the evidence.  It is only when he decides this question in favour of the defence that he must leave it to the jury, for a trial judge is not bound to put every defence suggested by counsel in the absence of some evidentiary base. Indeed, he should not do so, for to put a wholly unsupported defence would only cause confusion. [Emphasis added.]
      In my view, Ewanchuk does not stand for the proposition that a trial judge sitting without a jury has a duty to address issues that were not raised.  The existence of such a duty is incompatible with what the Supreme Court of Canada has said concerning a trial judge’s duty to give sufficient reasons.  It should be noted that the present case does not require consideration of a trial judge’s duty to assist a self-represented accused: see R. v. Neidig, 2018 BCCA 485 at paras. 90–93.
      As discussed in R. v. Squire, 1976 CanLII 26 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 13 at 19, when a jury is the trier-of-fact, defence counsel may choose not to advance alternative or inconsistent positions in their jury address out of concern that doing so might weaken or prejudice the accused’s primary position.
 For example, in a murder case in which the live issues are alibi (i.e., the accused contends they were elsewhere when the crime was committed) and whether the perpetrator had the requisite mens rea, defence counsel might choose to focus solely on alibi, rather than saying to the jury, in effect, “You should find my client was not there, but if you are satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that my client was there, then you should find they did not have the requisite state of mind.”  Counsel can be selective, safe in the knowledge the trial judge has an obligation to charge the jury on all defences for which, on the evidence, there is an “air of reality”: R. v. Cinous, 2002 SCC 29 at para. 51, 2 S.C.R. 3.  It is now common for trial judges to discuss with counsel the instructions to be given a jury at a pre-charge conference.  One of the purposes of such conferences is to provide defence counsel the opportunity to request the jury be instructed on matters counsel does not wish to mention in closing submissions.  However, the concerns referred to in Squires do not exist in judge-alone trials.
     
With respect to judge-alone trials, the Supreme Court of Canada has stated repeatedly that judges are entitled to rely on the submissions of counsel as delineating what is in dispute—i.e., the “live issues”—and to decide the case on that basis.  As Justice Charron stated in R. v. Dinardo, 2008 SCC 24, 1 S.C.R. 788: [R. v. Sheppard, 2002 SCC 26, [2002] 1 S.C.R. 869] instructs appeal courts to adopt a functional approach to reviewing the sufficiency of reasons (para. 55). 
The inquiry should not be conducted in the abstract, but should be directed at whether the reasons respond to the case’s live issues, having regard to the evidence as a whole and the submissions of counsel (R. v. D. (J.J.R.) (2006), 2006 CanLII 40088 (ON CA), 215 C.C.C. (3d) 252 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 32).  An appeal based on insufficient reasons will only be allowed where the trial judge's reasons are so deficient that they foreclose meaningful appellate review: Sheppard, at para. 25. {Emphasis added.] Justice Binnie put it this way in R. v. Walker, 2008 SCC 34 at para. 20, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 245: Reasons are sufficient if they are responsive to the case’s live issues and the parties’ key arguments.  Their sufficiency should be measured not in the abstract, but as they respond to the substance of what was in issue. [Emphasis added.] See also: R. v. R.E.M., 2008 SCC 51 at para. 43, [2008] 3 S.C.R. 3.
      Mr. Gates’s consent was never a live issue.  Although self-defence was the primary argument advanced on Mr. Zsombor’s behalf, his counsel also argued that the Crown had failed to prove the punch he threw amounted to an aggravated assault.  In advancing that alternative argument, counsel referred to the need for the Crown to prove Mr. Zsombor intentionally punched Mr. Gates and that a reasonable person in Mr. Zsombor’s circumstances would have realized punching Mr. Gates in the head would subject Mr. Gates to the risk of bodily harm.  However, a “consent fight” defence was never advanced; indeed, it was not apparent on the evidence.  Accordingly, the trial judge was not obligated to deal with consent.
     
I would not accede to this ground of appeal. Disposition
     
I would dismiss this appeal.
