./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/ca/2023bcca50.html
        
SKOLROOD J.A.: On August 6, 2021, the appellant, Clinton Armstrong, was convicted of multiple counts arising out of two incidents involving his former common law spouse. With respect to the first incident, which occurred on December 28, 2019, Mr. Armstrong was convicted of one count of common assault, contrary to s. 266 of the Criminal Code.
        
With respect to the second incident, which occurred on February 10, 2020, after he and the complainant had separated, Mr. Armstrong was convicted of: a)    aggravated assault, contrary to s. 268(2); b)    assault with a weapon, contrary to s. 267(a); c)    forcible confinement, contrary to s. 279(2); d)    uttering threats, contrary to s. 264.1(1); 
e)    breaking and entering for the purpose of committing an offence, contrary to s. 348(1)(b); f)    
mischief, contrary to s. 430(3); and g)    two counts of failing to comply with conditions of an undertaking, contrary to s. 145(4)(a).
        
Mr. Armstrong was acquitted on a charge of attempted murder.
        
Mr. Armstrong was sentenced on November 15, 2021. On all of the counts other than the aggravated assault and the breaking and entering, the effective sentence was time served. For the aggravated assault, Mr. Armstrong was sentenced to seven years, which resulted in an effective sentence of four years, 128 days given time served. For the breaking and entering, Mr. Armstrong was sentenced to eight years, which resulted in an effective sentence of five years, 128 days with time served. The sentences were to run concurrently.
        
This Court has granted an extension of time, and Mr. Armstrong now seeks leave to appeal his sentence on the basis that the judge erred in principle, resulting in a global sentence that is unfit. Mr. Armstrong submits that a global sentence, before time served, should properly have been in the range of four to five years. Circumstances of the Offences
        
As noted, the incident giving rise to the first count occurred on December 28, 2019. At the time, Mr. Armstrong and the complainant had been living together in the complainant’s home but had agreed that they would separate. Mr. Armstrong was to move out on January 1, 2020. On the evening of December 28th, Mr. Armstrong and the complainant had an argument during which Mr. Armstrong slapped her face and pushed her on the chest. Police attended and arrested Mr. Armstrong. He was subsequently released.
        
The complainant remained unsettled by the incident and, on February 6, 2020, she provided a victim impact statement to Crown counsel. Four days later, on February 10, 2020, Mr. Armstrong returned to the complainant’s home, smashed a window, and broke into the home. He then attacked the complainant with a boxcutter‑type tool. The complainant managed to call 911 when she heard the sounds of her home being broken into and the line remained open throughout much of the attack. The judge described the attack and resulting injuries inflicted by Mr. Armstrong in these terms:
       Mr. Armstrong backed [the complainant] up into the living room area and proceeded to slash her face, head, and torso repeatedly. She described her injuries at trial and they were documented by a forensic nurse examiner. Mr. Armstrong inflicted a very deep, 16‑centimetre gash from the level of her temple down through her left cheek, leaving a scar that is still apparent; and 11‑centimetre‑long wound from below her right ear lobe to her right jaw; and a five‑centimetre-long wound along her right cheek, as well as numerous other gashes, abrasions, and puncture wounds to her face and neck. As they struggled, Mr. Armstrong inflicted more superficial cuts across her chest, down and across her abdomen, and also on her back, across her right shoulder blade. All told, the forensic nurse documented more than a dozen injuries to [the complainant’s] face and head and a similar number to her torso. [The complainant] also sustained apparent defensive wounds to her arms and hands, including a deep cut across the tip of her right thumb that took five stitches.
        
Throughout the attack, Mr. Armstrong repeatedly stated that he intended to kill the complainant. At some point, the complainant attempted to escape but Mr. Armstrong caught her and told her, “Fight for your life”. The complainant then did manage to escape to a neighbour’s home. Mr. Armstrong followed her for a short distance then stopped and returned to the complainant’s home where he vandalized her car. He then went into the house and vandalized it as well, causing significant damage. He was finally subdued by the police. Circumstances of the Offender
        
Mr. Armstrong was 50 years old at the time of the offences. He has a steady work history. He and the complainant had been in a relationship for 13 years, in which there were no prior incidents of physical violence.
      The judge described Mr. Armstrong as having a significant history of alcohol abuse and a lengthy period of opiate dependency, and noted that he had been convicted of impaired driving in 1990 and 1992. The judge also referred to previous engagements with the justice system, including a restraining order issued in 2004, involving a former partner, and an assault of another partner in 2005, for which he received a suspended sentence. Mr. Armstrong subsequently breached the terms of his probation order. The judge observed that Mr. Armstrong’s history illustrates “the risk he poses to intimate partners” (at para. 37).
      The judge referred to psychometric testing of Mr. Armstrong conducted by Dr. Dugbartey, who suggested that Mr. Armstrong was “a man in need of anger management treatment” (at para. 39). Dr. Dugbartey also opined:
     …Mr. Armstrong presents with high risk for violence in intimate partner relationships. This risk would remain elevated in the medium term and with particular focus upon [the complainant]. His intimate partner violence risk in general would be especially high when the object of his romantic intimate partner decides to end the relationship. In my formulation, control in intimate relationships is a significant area of problem for this man.
      As part of his reasons for sentence, the judge noted that although Mr. Armstrong pled not guilty to all counts, at trial he only seriously contested the counts of attempted murder—of which he was acquitted—forcible confinement and the common assault of December 28, 2019. The judge noted that Mr. Armstrong professed to having no memory of the February 10, 2020 incident, that he said he was not a violent person, and that he professed to be extremely remorseful (at para. 17). Reasons for Sentence
     
Having reviewed the circumstances of the offence and of Mr. Armstrong, the judge observed that he risked “stating the obvious to say that his blameworthiness is at the high end of the scale” (at para. 43). The judge identified a number of aggravating circumstances, including (at para. 45): a)    There was some degree of premeditation, as evidenced by the fact that Mr. Armstrong went to the complainant’s home armed with the boxcutter; b)    The assault was committed while Mr. Armstrong was on undertakings that had been put in place for the complainant’s protection; c)    The assault involved breaking and entering, violating the peace and security the complainant was entitled to in her home, and forcible confinement within her home; d)    It was a very violent crime, with grievous injuries and psychological terrorization through the uttering of death threats; e)    The complainant had been Mr. Armstrong’s intimate partner. The judge noted that this latter factor is a mandatory aggravating factor under s. 718.2(a)(ii) of the Criminal Code (at para. 46). 
      The judge then observed that there was little that could be said for Mr. Armstrong in terms of mitigating factors. The judge acknowledged that Mr. Armstrong only seriously contested the counts of attempted murder, forcible confinement, and the common assault of December 28, 2019. He also acknowledged the defence submission that this should be considered as tantamount to a guilty plea on the other charges, but held that “[g]iven Mr. Armstrong’s lack of insight and failure to accept personal responsibility, this factor has only very slight weight” (at para. 48).
     
The judge discussed the parity principle, citing the decision of this Court in R. v. MacDonald, 2012 BCCA 155. He reviewed a number of authorities cited by both the Crown and the defence, including R. v. Biln, 1999 BCCA 369, where this Court referred to a sentence range for aggravated assault of two years less a day to six years, and R. v. Craig, 2005 BCCA 484, where this Court referred to a number of cases in which the low end of the range was said to be 16 months. He also noted a number of cases in which the sentence imposed was both lower and higher than that range. Based upon his review of the relevant cases, the judge set out a number of points that informed his sentence analysis (at para. 69): a)    The upper end of the typical range of sentences for aggravated assault appears to have increased from six years to a usual upper end of seven years or more, subject to all of the caveats that go along with considering and applying sentencing ranges; b)    Sentencing ranges in the cases have been global ranges, involving both cases of intimate partner violence as well as violence against strangers. The judge queried whether a distinct or higher range of sentencing should be articulated for cases involving intimate partner violence, given the inclusion of such violence as a specific aggravating factor in s. 718.2(a)(ii) of the Criminal Code; and c)    Unless or until a distinct range is formulated for intimate partner violence cases, given the Code mandates such violence as an aggravating factor, premeditated intimate violence cases leading to serious personal injury may be appropriately situated at or towards the high end of the conventional range.
      Applying those principles, the judge imposed a sentence of seven years for the aggravated assault. With respect to the break and enter charge, the judge noted that had Mr. Armstrong’s criminal conduct upon breaking and entering the complainant’s home been limited to the aggravated assault, he would have imposed a similar seven‑year sentence. However, given the other offences committed, including the “wanton destruction” of the complainant’s property, he imposed an eight‑year sentence to run concurrently (at para. 72). On Appeal
      Mr. Armstrong submits that the judge erred in principle in imposing a sentence of seven years for the aggravated assault count.
     
Specifically, Mr. Armstrong submits: a)    the judge failed to consider relevant factors which led him to ignore the presence of mitigating circumstances; and b)    the judge erred by imposing a disparate and disproportionate sentence on Mr. Armstrong. Standard of Review
      The standard of review on a sentence appeal was succinctly stated by Justice Stromberg‑Stein in this Court’s recent decision in R. v. Garie, 2022 BCCA 382:
     The basis for appellate intervention in sentencing is narrow: R. v. Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64; R. v. Friesen, 2020 SCC 9. An appellate court will only interfere with a sentence where there has been an error in principle impacting the sentence, or where the sentence is demonstrably unfit: Lacasse at paras. 41–4; Friesen at para. 26. An error in principle includes an error of law, a failure to consider a relevant factor, or an erroneous consideration of an aggravating or mitigating factor: Friesen at para. 26. A sentencing judge is entitled to significant deference in weighing and balancing factors relevant to crafting a fit sentence; appellate intervention is warranted only where a sentencing judge has exercised their discretion unreasonably, not merely because an appellate court would have weighed the factors differently: Lacasse at para. 9; R. v. Nasogaluak, 2010 SCC 6 at para. 46. Discussion (1) Did the judge err in principle by failing to consider relevant mitigating circumstances?
     
Mr. Armstrong submits that in stating that there was little that could be said in the way of mitigating factors, the judge failed to consider, or give adequate weight to, a number of factors including: a)    the fact that he only contested three of the charges; 
b)    as set out in a pre‑sentence report, he completed a number of rehabilitative programs and expressed a willingness to engage in additional counselling; 
c)    he is remorseful, as noted in the pre‑sentence report and as he expressed personally in court; d)    there was no history of violence in his relationship with the complainant; and e)    he has a history of gainful employment.
      In addition, Mr. Armstrong submits that the judge amplified his personal circumstances by referring to a history of alcohol and substance abuse and his previous engagements with the justice system involving former intimate partners. Mr. Armstrong makes the point that both issues arose years before the offences in issue; his conviction for impaired driving was over 30 years ago and his assault charge resulting in a suspended sentence was 18 years ago.
      I am unable to accept Mr. Armstrong’s submission on this ground of appeal. The various factors noted by Mr. Armstrong were identified and considered by the judge. For example, the judge acknowledged that Mr. Armstrong only contested three of the charges, but he gave little weight to that factor given what he described as Mr. Armstrong’s lack of insight and failure to accept personal responsibility (at para. 48). That lack of insight similarly led the judge to place minimal weight on Mr. Armstrong’s professed remorse. 
      Mr. Armstrong submits that this observation by the judge ignores the statement he made in court in which he said he was sorry, that he never meant to hurt the complainant, and that he had to take responsibility. Respectfully, I disagree. The judge heard what Mr. Armstrong had to say, but he was also alive to the fact that Mr. Armstrong continued to deny the December 28th assault, and that he professed to have no memory of the events of February 10, 2020. The judge also had before him the pre‑sentence report in which the author noted that Mr. Armstrong “was unable to provide any insight or accountability regarding the incident”. In the circumstances, I do not accept that the judge ignored Mr. Armstrong’s professed remorse and responsibility.
      In terms of Mr. Armstrong’s criminal history, the judge was fully aware of when the events occurred, but found that that history was relevant to assessing the risk of Mr. Armstrong reoffending. The judge’s finding was supported by the psychological assessment that described Mr. Armstrong as presenting a “high risk for violence in intimate partner relationships”.
      The judge was also aware of, and considered, Mr. Armstrong’s work history, as well as the absence of prior violence in the relationship. The judge noted that the absence of violence distinguished this case from other cases of intimate partner violence where there was a history of abuse, but it did not mitigate the seriousness of the offences here (at para. 35).
      In my respectful view, the judge did what sentencing judges are required to do; he balanced all of the relevant circumstances, including mitigating and aggravating factors, in order to arrive at a fit and proper sentence. Mr. Armstrong is effectively asking this Court to engage in a process of reweighing those factors. That is not the role of this Court, and does not accord with the standard of deference owed to sentencing judges: see R. v. Padda, 2019 BCCA 351 at para. 24.
      I would not accede to this ground of appeal. (2) Did the judge err in imposing a disparate and disproportionate sentence?
      Mr. Armstrong submits that the judge misapplied the principle of parity. Specifically, Mr. Armstrong submits that the judge imposed a sentence on the aggravated assault count in excess of the sentences in many of the cases cited to the judge, several of which Mr. Armstrong says involved more egregious facts. Further, Mr. Armstrong submits that the judge erred when he suggested that the upper end of the sentence range for aggravated assault has increased from six to seven years. He cites R. v. Randhawa, 2019 BCCA 429, where this Court referred to the range of 16 months to six years.
      Mr. Armstrong submits that there are no exceptional circumstances here that would justify a sentence outside of this range, and that given the numerous mitigating factors that he again says the judge ignored, an appropriate global sentence is in the range of four to five years, before credit for time served.
      In my view, the judge did not misapply or ignore the principle of parity, nor did he otherwise err in imposing a sentence of seven years for the aggravated assault. It is well established that sentencing ranges are guidelines, not hard and fast rules, and that simply departing from a sentence range is not itself an error of principle: R. v. Friesen, 2020 SCC 9 at para. 37; R. v. Parranto, 2021 SCC 46 at paras. 36–37.
      Further, there is no requirement for there to be exceptional circumstances in order to justify a sentence outside of an articulated range. The issue is whether the sentence is proportionate to the offence committed and the moral blameworthiness of the offender: R. v. Ellis, 2022 BCCA 278 at paras. 117–119; Parranto at para. 40.
      As noted, the judge considered all of the relevant circumstances, including mitigating and aggravating factors, and concluded that the assault of the complainant was a “grave crime with a high degree of moral culpability” (at para. 70). The judge put particular weight on the fact that the assault occurred in the context of an intimate partner relationship and that Mr. Armstrong broke into the complainant’s home to commit the assault. As the Crown submits, similar home invasion type offences have resulted in sentences of 10 years or more: citing as examples, R. v. D.A.W., 2002 BCCA 336 at para. 32; R. v. Smith, 2020 BCCA 87 at paras. 32–36. Those cases lack the additional aggravating factor of intimate partner violence.
      In these circumstances, I am unable to find that the sentence of seven years imposed for the aggravated assault is demonstrably unfit or that the judge erred in principle. With respect to the sentence for the break and enter, Mr. Armstrong submits that it was impacted by the sentence for the aggravated assault and that had the assault sentence been less, so too would the sentence for the break and enter. Given my finding that the sentence for aggravated assault was fit, there is no basis upon which to disturb the sentence for the break and enter.
      In light of these findings, it is not necessary to decide on this appeal whether the top end of the effective range of sentence for aggravated assault has increased, or whether there should be a new sentence range or analytical framework for sentencing of violent assaults in an intimate partner context. Disposition
      For the reasons stated, I would grant leave to appeal, but I would dismiss the appeal.
      MACKENZIE J.A.: I agree.
      WILLCOCK J.A.: I agree.
      MACKENZIE J.A.: Leave to appeal is granted, but the appeal is dismissed.
