./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/ca/2023bcca3.html
        
James Wilkinson and another man were walking late at night on a street in Duncan, B.C. Mr. Wilkinson was wearing a backpack. Plainclothes police officers on patrol observed them and concluded that the two were acting suspiciously. When the men suddenly ran in the opposite direction into a vacant lot, the officers pursued them on foot. Mr. Wilkinson was eventually detained. The police recovered the backpack, which had been discarded by Mr. Wilkinson during the pursuit. A search of his backpack revealed that it contained a quantity of illicit drugs among other things. Mr. Wilkinson was later convicted of two counts of possession of a controlled substance for the purpose of trafficking and one count of possession of a controlled substance. He appeals those convictions.
        
This appeal raises issues of arbitrary detention, the unreasonable search and seizure of the backpack, and whether there was timely compliance with the informational component of ss. 10(a) and (b) of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.
        
I would dismiss the appeal. 
Background
        
On July 13, 2019, Constable Houlgate and Corporal March of the RCMP were assigned to a “street crime unit” in Duncan, B.C., a small community on Vancouver Island. The officers were in plainclothes. Cst. Houlgate was driving an unmarked police vehicle and Cpl. March was the passenger. The officers were on patrol and not investigating any specific crime. 
        
At around 11:30 p.m., while driving on Howard St., Cst. Houlgate noticed two men walking on the sidewalk next to a vacant lot. They were wearing dark clothing, looking around a lot, and according to Cst. Houlgate, appearing “skittish”. One of the men, later identified as Mr. Wilkinson, was wearing a backpack. When the officers slowed down for a stop sign, they looked at the men to see if they recognized them — they did not. There had been a theft in the area, and a suspect had been identified. The officers confirmed at that time that neither man was the suspect in the theft.
        
The two men suddenly turned and ran in the opposite direction, away from the police car and into a vacant lot at the corner of Howard and Dingwall Streets. One of the men fled and got away from police. There did not appear to be any reason, other than the police presence, to cause the men to run.
        
Initially, Cst. Houlgate reversed the car and turned it so the headlights were on the vacant lot. They did not use any siren or emergency lights. Mr. Wilkinson, still wearing the backpack, came running out of the lot and ran southbound. Cst. Houlgate attempted to intercept him with the vehicle. 
        
Both officers got out of the car, calling out “stop police”. Mr. Wilkinson ran back into the vacant lot, tripped over a fence, and fell down. When told to stop, Mr. Wilkinson looked at Cpl. March, said “okay”, but then kept running. He tripped over another fence, fell, and managed to get up and keep running. When he came out of the lot, he no longer had the backpack and was not wearing shoes. Cst. Houlgate called out “stop police” again, but Mr. Wilkinson continued running until he tripped and fell a third time, when the police caught up to him. This sequence of events took one to two minutes. Mr. Wilkinson struggled causing the officers to handcuff him behind his back. He was detained to prevent him from fleeing and to identify him.
        
Cst. Houlgate believed he had grounds to detain the individuals when he started the pursuit. While he did not have a specific offence in mind, he based his grounds on the following facts: the area was known as a high-crime area with a lot of drug and property crimes; it was dark and late at night (11:30 p.m.); the “skittish” behaviour of the individuals of repeatedly looking around, the flight from police; and, the presence of a backpack, which could be used to hold break and enter tools, drugs, weapons, or stolen property. The flight from the scene was the “main trigger” for Cst. Houlgate. In his mind, someone fleeing in those circumstances either had a warrant for their arrest or were involved in committing a crime. He wanted to find out why they were running.
      Once Mr. Wilkinson was detained, Cst. Houlgate left him with Cpl. March while he searched for the backpack as he believed it would contain evidence. He was also concerned because he did not know where the other person had gone.
      He found one of Mr. Wilkinson’s shoes by the second fence; the backpack and the other shoe were by the first fence. He returned to where Cpl. March was detaining Mr. Wilkinson as there was better light to conduct a search of the backpack. Another one to two minutes had passed.
      In the meantime, Cpl. March did not tell Mr. Wilkinson why he was detained or advise him of his right to counsel. Cp. March said he was trying to catch his breath. He asked Mr. Wilkinson’s name and why he was running. Mr. Wilkinson replied that he was worried that he was going to get shot. Cpl. March testified to this statement on the voir dire, but the Crown made it clear that they were not tendering the statement. The statement was also given in cross-examination; however, counsel agreed that the trial judge should not consider it.
      Cst. Houlgate returned with the backpack and the shoes. He advised Mr. Wilkinson he was under arrest for trafficking, as he had looked in the backpack and seen some of the contents. Mr. Wilkinson was advised of his right to counsel at the same time. That occurred at 11:36 p.m. He was given access to counsel at the RCMP detachment.
      Cst. Houlgate testified that his ground for searching the backpack was because he believed that it was abandoned property. The backpack was found to include an envelope containing $1,035 cash; a bag with $1,330 cash; 97.3 grams of heroin/fentanyl; 4.9 grams of crack cocaine; 7.7 grams of powder cocaine; 0.5 grams of methamphetamine; 53.4 grams of caffeine; a purple cellphone charging cord, and a tag for a Mercedes-Benz. A key for a Mercedes-Benz and a cellphone matching the cord were found on Mr. Wilkinson’s person. Trial Judge’s Reasons Voir Dire ruling
      Mr. Wilkinson challenged his detention, arrest, search, and right to counsel under ss. 8, 9, 10(a), and 10(b) of the Charter. The trial judge’s ruling on the Charter applications is indexed at 2020 BCSC 2230 (“Voir Dire Ruling”).
      The trial judge first considered Mr. Wilkinson’s position that he was arbitrarily detained without grounds. Relying on R. v. Mann, 2004 SCC 52, he stated that if Mr. Wilkinson was validly detained, it was based on an investigative detention: Voir Dire Ruling at para. 11. He noted that Mann provides that police have authority to detain for investigative purposes if there are reasonable grounds to suspect the individual is connected to a particular crime. He explained that the test for investigative detention is a lower threshold than the reasonable and probable grounds required for lawful arrests. Relying on Mann and R. v. Reddy, 2010 BCCA 11, the trial judge also recognized that for detention and arrest, the police must subjectively believe that the requisite standard has been met, and the belief must be objectively reasonable: Voir Dire Ruling at para. 13.
      The trial judge then turned to the testimony of Cst. Houlgate and the basis for the officer’s subjective belief. Cst. Houlgate testified he believed there were grounds to detain Mr. Wilkinson because: (1) the area was a high‑crime area and the “ground zero” area for crime in Duncan; (2) it was dark and late at night (11:30 p.m.), and the two men were wearing dark clothing and one had a backpack; (3) the police were driving an unmarked police vehicle, but the vehicle was well-known in the community as being used by the police as an undercover vehicle; and, (4) the men started running after the car passed them, even though the police did not identify themselves until their vehicle stopped and they got out.
      The judge then considered whether the enumerated factors were objectively reasonable. He found that at the time the police first observed the two men, they were not doing anything objectionable. He was skeptical that everyone in Duncan knew the unmarked vehicle belonged to police even though that was the perception of the police. As such, he found there was no evidence as to whether Mr. Wilkinson knew that the car belonged to the police. In a similar vein, he also noted that the two police officers were in plainclothes. He then found that running away from an unmarked car late at night in a high-crime area did not support the level of suspicion necessary to justify an investigative detention. He stated that something more than a suspicion or hunch is required to reach the level of a reasonable suspicion: at para. 22. Furthermore, he concluded that there was no evidence that Mr. Wilkinson was committing a crime when he was seen running from the police vehicle. Neither being in a high-crime area or carrying a backpack supported a reasonable suspicion: at para. 24. Running away from the unmarked vehicle may give rise to a hunch, but that was not sufficient.
      Accordingly, the judge concluded that Mr. Wilkinson was arbitrarily detained.
      In terms of whether the search and seizure were unreasonable, he concluded that Mr. Wilkinson abandoned the backpack in an area owned by a third-party unknown to him while running away from police, and therefore, there was no violation of s. 8 of the Charter as a result of the search of the backpack.
      The judge then addressed ss. 10(a) and (b) and laid out a timeline of the events. The police testified they first saw the men at about 11:30 p.m. Mr. Wilkinson was advised of his right to counsel at 11:36 p.m. He stated that the evidence was that Mr. Wilkinson was given his ss. 10(a) and (b) warnings a short time after his detention. He concluded that Mr. Wilkinson was informed of his right to counsel within two to six minutes of his detention which was prompt and without any delay. Ruling on section 24(2) 
      Finding an arbitrary detention, the trial judge turned to s. 24(2) of the Charter in his reasons indexed at 2020 BCSC 2231 (“Ruling on 24(2)”). The trial judge set out the framework of s. 24(2), noting that the onus was on Mr. Wilkinson to show that the evidence was obtained in a manner that infringed his rights and that admitting the evidence would bring the administration of justice into disrepute.
      On the first step, the issue was whether the backpack and items on Mr. Wilkinson’s person were obtained in a manner that infringed his Charter rights and freedoms. He considered the Crown’s position that his finding on the voir dire that Mr. Wilkinson had abandoned the backpack was significant. He drew an analogy to the “garbage” cases, such as R. v. Patrick, 2009 SCC 17, where the evidence at issue was taken from garbage bags the accused had left in a public alleyway. The Supreme Court found that the accused had abandoned any reasonable expectation of privacy because he had done what was required for the bags to be picked up by the municipal collection system. The judge noted that while the backpack was not abandoned in a public place, it was left in a place that appeared to be abandoned: Ruling on 24(2) at para. 13. Unlike other garbage cases, there was no extension of his private property dwelling rights to the backpack because he did not live where the backpack had been abandoned.
      He then briefly discussed R. v. Edwards, 1 S.C.R. 128, 1996 CanLII 255 where the Supreme Court found there was no expectation of privacy in the accused’s girlfriend’s residence and that no personal right of the accused was affected by police conduct; therefore, he could not contest the admissibility of the evidence under s. 24(2) of the Charter. He then concluded that Mr. Wilkinson abandoned any privacy interest in the backpack when he ran away from it. As a result, he did not have standing to claim his property in the bag. He concluded that its contents were not obtained in a manner that infringed or denied Mr. Wilkinson’s rights or freedoms. He stated that this was sufficient to dispose of the s. 24(2) issue, but he went on to briefly review the issues related to the administration of justice.
      The trial judge discussed the three lines of inquiry the Supreme Court set out in R. v. Grant, 2009 SCC 32: (1) the seriousness of the Charter-infringing state conduct; (2) the impact of the breach on the accused’s Charter-protected interests; and (3) society’s interest in the adjudication of the case on its merits. First, he discussed the seriousness of the Charter-infringing state conduct. Based on the police having a valid subjective belief in the grounds for detention, the entire incident lasting mere minutes, there being no pattern of abuse or extreme measures, and the police having no reasonable suspicion to detain Mr. Wilkinson, the trial judge concluded the action of the police was on the minor end of the spectrum and favoured the admission of the backpack and its contents: at para. 19. 
      Second, he assessed the impact on the Charter interests of Mr. Wilkinson. He accepted that the detention negatively affected Mr. Wilkinson’s liberty, but he reiterated that the entire incident only took a few minutes. He found Mr. Wilkinson’s privacy interest was not violated, which also favoured the admission of the evidence.
      Third, he considered society’s interest in adjudication of the case on its merits. He stated that the exclusion of highly reliable evidence may have a more negative impact on the repute of the administration of justice when the remedy “guts” the prosecution. The Crown submitted that excluding the evidence would gut its case. The trial judge found that was worth some significant weight. He noted that the evidence at issue was physical and considered inherently reliable. He also commented that there was no suggestion the backpack did not belong to Mr. Wilkinson before he abandoned it or that it had been tampered with. He found the truth-seeking function of the justice system would be better served by the admission of the backpack and its contents, which favoured the admission of the evidence.
      The judge then considered the items found on Mr. Wilkinson’s person, namely the cellphone and Mercedes-Benz item. He found the conduct of the police was not reckless, but rather was a routine search incidental to his arrest. Mr. Wilkinson had a privacy interest in his person, but the search was not intrusive. The exclusion of the items would not gut the case, but it was physical evidence and there was no dispute about their ownership. The judge concluded they were admissible.
      The judge dismissed the application to exclude the evidence at issue.
      Mr. Wilkinson did not testify at the voir dire or trial proper.
      The judge issued separate reasons for conviction indexed at 2020 BCSC 2234. The judge reviewed the procedural background and set out the agreed statement of facts. He concluded that the Crown had proved beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Wilkinson had possession of the backpack with $2,365 cash and heroin/fentanyl valued between $7,200 and $19,460. The cocaine was valued at $820. The judge found Mr. Wilkinson guilty of possession of methamphetamine and of possession of heroin/fentanyl and cocaine for the purposes of trafficking. Issues on Appeal
      Mr. Wilkinson argues that the judge erred in concluding that there were no breaches of his Charter rights as a result of the search of his backpack and the failure to provide him with his ss. 10(a) and (b) rights in a timely manner. He further submits that the judge erred in admitting the evidence of the search of the backpack, pursuant to s. 24(2).
      The Crown submits that the judge erred in finding that Mr. Wilkinson was arbitrarily detained. 
Position of the Parties
      Mr. Wilkinson argues that the judge erred in finding that he abandoned the backpack and had no standing to assert a privacy interest in the backpack. He says there is no evidence that he had “thrown” the backpack, as neither officer had seen how he had become separated from the backpack as he tried to run away. 
      He further submits that the search of his backpack was not a search incidental to investigative detention, as the judge correctly found that he was arbitrarily detained. Even if he had been lawfully detained, the search went beyond what is permitted as incidental to detention.
      Mr. Wilkinson also submits that the judge erred in concluding that there was no violation of his ss. 10(a) and (b) rights. He was not given his Charter rights until Cst. Houlgate returned with the backpack. Despite not reading him his rights, Cpl. March questioned him about why he was running.
      Finally, Mr. Wilkinson contends that the judge erred by failing to exclude the evidence found in the backpack pursuant to s. 24(2) of the Charter. He submits that the judge made errors in his fact-finding in terms of when his s. 10 rights were read to him. Mr. Wilkinson contends that the judge erred in assessing the impact of the breach. Finally, he says the trial judge erred in his analysis of the third branch of the Grant test.
      The Crown submits the judge erred in concluding that the detention of Mr. Wilkinson was arbitrary. The Crown says the judge erred in the application of the reasonable suspicion test and failed to consider all of the evidence.
      The Crown contends that the judge made no error in finding that the backpack had been abandoned and that Mr. Wilkinson had no reasonable expectation of privacy. 
      The Crown submits that, in the circumstances, the short delay between detention and arrest was sufficient for the trial judge to conclude that there was no breach; in their view, this conclusion was reasonable.
      The Crown’s position first, is that there were no breaches of Mr. Wilkinson’s rights, but if the judge was correct in his conclusion that the detention of Mr. Wilkinson was arbitrary, the conclusion to admit the evidence pursuant to s. 24(2) should be given deference and not be overturned. Discussion Did the trial judge err in finding that there was an arbitrary detention?
     
Section 9 of the Charter states: Everyone has the right not to be arbitrarily detained or imprisoned.
      The purpose of s. 9 is to protect individual liberty from unjustified state interference: R. v. Tim, 2022 SCC 12, citing Grant at para. 20. Section 9 protects “the right of individuals to walk the streets free from interference”: Mann at para. 1. In Mann, the Court was required “to balance individual liberty rights and privacy interests with a societal interest in effective policing”: at para. 15.
     
Whether the appellant was detained raises a question of law, which is reviewable on a standard of correctness: R. v. Lafrance, 2022 SCC 32 at 23. In R. v. Le, 2019 SCC 34, the Court explained the applicable standard of review regarding detentions at paras. 23–24:
     Before engaging in any analysis in this appeal, it is necessary to identify the applicable standard of review. Questions of law on an appeal attract a standard of correctness (R. v. Shepherd, 2009 SCC 35, 2 S.C.R. 527, at para. 18). Questions of fact attract a palpable and overriding error standard (para. 18). The application of the law to a given factual matrix, that is, whether a legal standard is met, amounts to a question of law and attracts a correctness standard (Shepherd, at para. 20; Grant, at para. 43).
       In this judgment, we have respected, and used, the trial judge’s findings of fact to assess whether the lower courts were correct in their assessment of when a detention occurred. Here, the timing of the detention turned on when a reasonable person would perceive they were under compulsion and not free to leave. An appeals court is entitled to have a different view of the impact that police conduct would have on a reasonable person in the shoes of the accused. This is not, contrary to our colleague’s view, recasting the record, but rather engaging in the same type of legitimate review routinely conducted by appeals courts across this country.
      There is no issue about whether Mr. Wilkinson was detained; therefore, I will focus on whether the detention was arbitrary. 
      A lawful detention is not arbitrary: Mann at para. 20. An investigative detention short of arrest is permissible if conducted based on reasonable suspicion: see Grant at para. 55.
     
In Mann, the Court set out the test for investigative detention as follows:
     The case law raises several guiding principles governing the use of a police power to detain for investigative purposes. The evolution of the Waterfield test, along with the Simpson articulable cause requirement, calls for investigative detentions to be premised upon reasonable grounds. The detention must be viewed as reasonably necessary on an objective view of the totality of the circumstances, informing the officer’s suspicion that there is a clear nexus between the individual to be detained and a recent or on-going criminal offence. Reasonable grounds figures at the front-end of such an assessment, underlying the officer’s reasonable suspicion that the particular individual is implicated in the criminal activity under investigation. The overall reasonableness of the decision to detain, however, must further be assessed against all of the circumstances, most notably the extent to which the interference with individual liberty is necessary to perform the officer’s duty, the liberty interfered with, and the nature and extent of that interference, in order to meet the second prong of the Waterfield test.
      The judge interpreted the above-noted passage as requiring a specific crime investigation to be underway when the detention occurs. Subsequent decisions have clarified that is not always the case. 
      The judge appears not to have been provided with R. v. Chehil, 2013 SCC 49 — a more recent consideration of s. 9 that sets out the test for what amounts to reasonable suspicion. Chehil involved a sniff search of a suitcase by a dog trained to detect illicit drugs. One issue raised in the case was when the individual factors relied on by the police for forming reasonable suspicion are capable of innocent explanations. In concluding that the police had “a reasonable suspicion”, the Court clarified the test.
     
The Court concluded that all the circumstances were to be assessed collectively even though there may be innocent explanations:
     Reasonable suspicion derives its rigour from the requirement that it be based on objectively discernible facts, which can then be subjected to independent judicial scrutiny. This scrutiny is exacting, and must account for the totality of the circumstances. In Kang-Brown, Binnie J. provided the following definition of reasonable suspicion, at para. 75: The “reasonable suspicion” standard is not a new juridical standard called into existence for the purposes of this case. “Suspicion” is an expectation that the targeted individual is possibly engaged in some criminal activity. A “reasonable” suspicion means something more than a mere suspicion and something less than a belief based upon reasonable and probable grounds.
     Thus, while reasonable grounds to suspect and reasonable and probable grounds to believe are similar in that they both must be grounded in objective facts, reasonable suspicion is a lower standard, as it engages the reasonable possibility, rather than probability, of crime. As a result, when applying the reasonable suspicion standard, reviewing judges must be cautious not to conflate it with the more demanding reasonable and probable grounds standard. …
     Reasonable suspicion must be assessed against the totality of the circumstances. The inquiry must consider the constellation of objectively discernible facts that are said to give the investigating officer reasonable cause to suspect that an individual is involved in the type of criminal activity under investigation. This inquiry must be fact-based, flexible, and grounded in common sense and practical, everyday experience: see R. v. Bramley, 2009 SKCA 49, 324 Sask. R. 286, at para. 60. A police officer’s grounds for reasonable suspicion cannot be assessed in isolation: see Monney, at para. 50.
     
The Court examined some conduct that may amount to reasonable suspicion on its own, or as part of the constellation of factors taken as a whole. One of the factors that could support reasonable suspicion on its own was flight from the police. The Court said at paras. 31: 
     While some factors, such as travelling under a false name, or flight from the police, may give rise to reasonable suspicion on their own (Kang-Brown, at para. 87, per Binnie J.), other elements of a constellation will not support reasonable suspicion, except in combination with other factors. Generally, characteristics that apply broadly to innocent people are insufficient, as they are markers only of generalized suspicion. The same is true of factors that may “go both ways”, such as an individual’s making or failing to make eye contact. On their own, such factors cannot support reasonable suspicion; however, this does not preclude reasonable suspicion arising when the same factor is simply one part of a constellation of factors.
     
The Court additionally affirmed that even if innocent explanations arise on the evidence, that does not necessarily diminish the fact that the evidence may also support reasonable suspicion.
     Further, reasonable suspicion need not be the only inference that can be drawn from a particular constellation of factors. Much as the seven stars that form the Big Dipper have also been interpreted as a bear, a saucepan, and a plough, factors that give rise to a reasonable suspicion may also support completely innocent explanations. This is acceptable, as the reasonable suspicion standard addresses the possibility of uncovering criminality, and not a probability of doing so. [Emphasis in original.]
     
The Court also clarified that there was no necessity for evidence of a specific known criminal act, but it requires conduct that points to the possibility of criminal behaviour. At para. 35, the Court opined:
     Finally, the objective facts must be indicative of the possibility of criminal behaviour. While I agree with the appellant’s submission that police must point to particularized conduct or particularized evidence of criminal activity in order to ground reasonable suspicion, I do not accept that the evidence must itself consist of unlawful behaviour, or must necessarily be evidence of a specific known criminal act.
      The trial judge concluded that running away from an unmarked police car at night in a high-crime area did not support the level of suspicion to justify an investigative detention. He concluded that the officers were operating on a “hunch” and that there was “no evidence Mr. Wilkinson was committing a crime when he was seen running from the police vehicle”: Voir Dire Ruling at para. 24. He accepted that the officers had subjective reasonable suspicion, but that it was not objectively reasonable.
      In my view, the trial judge erred in his analysis and conclusion with respect to whether Mr. Wilkinson was detained. The judge failed to consider the entirety of the circumstances. He concluded that Mr. Wilkinson was entitled to walk around at night in a high-crime area wearing dark clothes. That conclusion, in and of itself, is unassailable. But there was more evidence to collectively consider. Yet, the judge went on to conclude that the flight in and of itself, did not amount to reasonable suspicion because there was no evidence Mr. Wilkinson was committing a crime plus there was an innocent explanation for his flight, that he was afraid of being shot. This conclusion does not take into account the reasoning from Chehil that suggests that factors such as flight from police can give rise to reasonable suspicion on their own. Furthermore, as noted above, there is no need for the police to be investigating a specific crime, particularly when they are conducting a community patrol. The fact of a potentially innocent explanation (which parenthetically, the judge had accepted was not evidence before him) does not eliminate the inference of a guilty conscience from the flight — both inferences are available and can objectively support a reasonable suspicion. In his analysis, the judge discounted each piece of evidence individually, rather than considering the evidence as a whole.
      In my opinion, the judge, by failing to consider the entire circumstances, and in particular, how those circumstances coalesced, erred in concluding that Mr. Wilkinson’s detention was arbitrary. The evidence viewed as a whole supports a subjective and objective suspicion that entitled the police to detain Mr. Wilkinson. In my view, when the test is correctly applied, the evidence supports a reasonable suspicion as opposed to a “hunch”.
      Although Mr. Wilkinson was lawfully detained, that does not end the matter in terms of the search of his backpack. While the police are entitled to perform a search of the person when they are lawfully detained, that search may not have included Mr. Wilkinson’s backpack if it had been with him at the time he was detained: see Mann at para. 45. Indeed, the Crown did not argue on appeal that the search of the backpack was pursuant to a lawful investigative detention. I turn now to the issue of whether the judge correctly concluded that the backpack had been abandoned. Did the trial judge err in concluding that the search was reasonable because the backpack had been abandoned?
     
Section 8 of the Charter reads: Everyone has the right to be secure against unreasonable search or seizure.
      It is well-recognized that s. 8 protects against unreasonable intrusions by the state into the privacy interests of an accused, but it extends only to expectations of privacy that are objectively reasonable in the totality of the circumstances: R. v. Reeves, 2018 SCC 56 at para. 110. Whether the search of the backpack was reasonable is reviewable on a standard of correctness as it raises a question of law: Housen v. Nikolaisen, 2002 SCC 33 at para. 8 
      The evidence with respect to the retrieval and search of the backpack comes from Cst. Houlgate. He observed that one of the individuals — now known to be Mr. Wilkinson — was wearing a backpack. After the pursuit began, Mr. Wilkinson tripped and fell over a fence and kept running. He tripped and fell again. At some point, he no longer had the backpack. Mr. Wilkinson did not testify. The question is whether the backpack was abandoned, depriving Mr. Wilkinson of a privacy interest in the backpack, or whether he retained that privacy interest.
      The trial judge, in brief reasons, concluded that Mr. Wilkinson abandoned the backpack thereby losing any privacy interest in the backpack. He concluded that there was no breach of s. 8 of the Charter when Cst. Houlgate searched the backpack. The judge expanded his reasons when addressing the application to exclude the evidence under s. 24(2), flowing from his conclusion that Mr. Wilkinson was arbitrarily detained. He drew an analogy with the “so-called garbage cases”, citing Patrick. He also considered Edwards and determined that Mr. Wilkinson did not have standing to challenge the search based on the finding that he had abandoned any privacy interest in it when he ran away from the backpack.
      Mr. Wilkinson argues that the judge erred by factually finding that he had “thrown” the backpack away when there was no such evidence. A close review of the reasons for judgment does not reveal that the trial judge made that finding. The trial judge instead accepted that Mr. Wilkinson no longer had the backpack when he was detained and that it had been dropped in that area. The trial judge ultimately concluded the backpack was abandoned; and at no time did he suggest that Mr. Wilkinson had “thrown” it away. 
     
Mr. Wilkinson relies on R. v. Law, 2002 SCC 10 to support his position that his reasonable expectation of privacy was not relinquished just because the police recovered the lost property. In Law, the police recovered a stolen safe open in a field. The Court held:
     Courts have, to be sure, recognized situations where it is unreasonable to expect personal property or information to remain private. It has been held that an individual can effectively abandon his own property by relinquishing any privacy interest in it: see Stillman, supra. It has also been implied that where the police recover property that has been cast off or stolen, they may infer it has been “abandoned” for the purposes of their investigation: R. v. LeBlanc (1981), 1981 CanLII 3213 (NB CA), 64 C.C.C. (2d) 31 (N.B.C.A.), cited in Dyment, supra, at p. 435; see also, United States v. Procopio, 88 F.3d 21 (1st Cir. 1996). Without more, however, the mere fact that the police recover lost or stolen property is insufficient to support an inference that the owner voluntarily relinquished his expectation of privacy in the item. The question remains: on the facts of the case, did the owner have a reasonable expectation of privacy in the item, or had he relinquished it? [Emphasis added.]
      However, in this case, the backpack was neither lost nor stolen. The judge inferred that Mr. Wilkinson “released” the backpack in a private lot over which he had no control. 
      Mr. Wilkinson submits that this Court’s decision in Reddy is applicable to this case. In Reddy, the majority concluded that Mr. Reddy was arbitrarily detained and that removing his jacket, leaving it in his car, and fleeing from police did not deprive him of his privacy interest in the jacket. In this case, Mr. Wilkinson was fleeing, and along the way discarded the backpack he was wearing. Unlike Mr. Reddy, dropping the backpack did not occur during an unlawful detention, but it occurred during the pursuit. 
     
Whether something is abandoned is a question of fact. In Patrick, the Supreme Court of Canada, in considering whether the disposal of garbage resulted in a loss of a privacy interest said the following at para. 25: 
     Abandonment is therefore an issue of fact. The question is whether the claimant to s. 8 protection has acted in relation to the subject matter of his privacy claim in such a manner as to lead a reasonable and independent observer to conclude that his continued assertion of a privacy interest is unreasonable in the totality of the circumstances.
      In this case, Mr. Wilkinson was running away from the officers who had identified themselves as police. When he started running, he was wearing a backpack. During the flight he fell on at least two occasions. He “released” the backpack when he fell the first time and kept running. Mr. Wilkinson did not testify. The judge drew the inference that he abandoned the backpack, and therefore lost any expectation of privacy in the backpack. I see no basis to interfere with that conclusion.
      Cst. Houlgate testified that he searched the backpack as abandoned property. He was correct in that assessment. The search of the backpack was not conducted incidental to the investigative detention. It was searched on the basis that it was abandoned. Did the trial judge err in his findings with respect to the alleged breaches of the right to counsel?
     
Section 10 of the Charter requires the following: 
10. Everyone has the right on arrest or detention 
(a) to be informed promptly of the reasons therefor; (b) to retain and instruct counsel without delay and to be informed of that right; …
      The officers handcuffed Mr. Wilkinson on detention. Cst. Houlgate left to look for the backpack and shoes. Cpl. March stayed with Mr. Wilkinson and asked him why he was running. He replied because he thought he was going to be shot. He was not advised of either the reasons for his detention or his right to counsel until Cst. Houlgate returned with the backpack. Cpl. March gave the evidence regarding the statement in direct examination; however, the Crown stopped him and said they were not tendering Mr. Wilkinson’s statement about the reason he fled. The defence elicited the statement in cross-examination. The parties agreed, and the judge accepted, that the evidence was not admissible. Despite that agreement, as noted above, the judge still considered the statement to the advantage of Mr. Wilkinson in his Voir Dire Ruling at para. 20. He considered it as an alternate or innocent explanation for running.
     
Mr. Wilkinson submits that the judge made a palpable and overriding error of fact when assessing the circumstances in relation to the provision of the s. 10 rights to Mr. Wilkinson where he said (quoting from the appellant’s factum), “… Mr. Wilkinson was given his s. 10(a) and (b) warnings a short time after he was detained on the ground. The only event that occurred after that [after detention – emphasis added by appellant] was Constable Colgate [sic] retracing the short distance back to the first fence…Constable Colgate [sic] retrieved the backpack [emphasis added by appellant] and then returned to Mr. Wilkinson…”. Mr. Wilkinson says that the other thing that happened was critical — Cst. Houlgate searched the backpack before the s. 10 rights were given, and that the judge overlooked that evidence.
      The judge said the following about the provision of the right to counsel at paras. 8 and 39 of the Voir Dire Ruling:
       While returning with the backpack, Constable Colgate [sic] searched it and he observed packages which he believed contained drugs. There was also cash, an unusual charging cord for a cellphone, an envelope, and a tag for a Mercedes‑Benz. He believed there were grounds to arrest the male, and proceeded to do so when he returned to Corporal March and the male. Another police officer arrived and conducted a search of Mr. Wilkinson. …
     The evidence is also that Mr. Wilkinson was given his s. 10(a) and 10(b) warnings a short time after he was detained on the ground. The only event that occurred after that was Constable Colgate [sic] retracing the short distance back to the first fence where Mr. Wilkinson had tripped the first time. Constable Colgate [sic] retrieved the backpack and shoes and then returned to Mr. Wilkinson and Corporal March. Constable Colgate [sic] had opened and inspected the backpack while walking back.
     
In the Ruling on s. 24(2) at para. 4, the trial judge accepted these facts:
       One peace officer went back and retrieved the backpack and two shoes. The other peace officer asked the male for his name, and he identified himself as Mr. Wilkinson. The police officer also asked Mr. Wilkinson why he ran. To this he said he was afraid of being shot because it had happened before. Charter warnings were given. The other police officer returned with the backpack and shoes.
      The evidence was that Mr. Wilkinson was arrested and his ss. 10(a) and (b) rights were provided by Cst. Houlgate when he returned after looking in the backpack. While the judge’s reasons are not crystal clear with respect to the events, in my view, reading the reasons as a whole, the judge did not mistake the facts. He was aware that the arrest and provision of Charter rights were given by Cst. Houlgate after he had inspected the backpack.
      The trial judge concluded that everything occurred very quickly. About six minutes elapsed from the beginning of the chase to the time Mr. Wilkinson was read his rights. The trial judge concluded that Mr. Wilkinson was advised of his rights within two to six minutes of his detention, which was in his assessment promptly and without delay.
      This Court has found that “immediate” does not mean “instantaneous” given that sometimes practical considerations play a role in what is considered immediate for the purposes of s. 10(b): R. v. Fan, 2017 BCCA 99 at para. 53. Here, Mr. Wilkinson struggled and resisted detention, so he was handcuffed. The officers did not know where the other person was. Cst. Houlgate left to find the backpack. Cpl. March was out of breath from running after Mr. Wilkinson. 
      In my view, while Mr. Wilkinson’s rights were provided promptly after the police found the contents of the backpack, Cpl. March did not refrain from questioning Mr. Wilkinson pending the notification of his s. 10 rights. The statement obtained by Cpl. March regarding his reason for running was not and could not have been tendered by the Crown as it was obtained prior to compliance with the Charter. However, there is no nexus between the search of the backpack and the statement provided by Mr. Wilkinson. Cpl. March should not have elicited a statement from Mr. Wilkinson until there was compliance with s. 10. However, no impugned evidence flowed from that conduct. To the contrary, the Crown expressly indicated that they would not be seeking to tender the statement that was obtained prior to Mr. Wilkinson being read his rights.
      In my view, although for slightly different reasons than the trial judge, the officers complied with s. 10 of the Charter. Conclusion
      There is no need to consider s. 24(2) given my conclusion that the trial judge erred in finding that Mr. Wilkinson’s detention was not arbitrary and there were no other Charter breaches that affected the search of the backpack.
      I would dismiss the appeal.
