./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/ca/2023bcca2.html
        
David Johnathan Michael Kehoe is Métis. On February 19, 2021, the trial judge convicted him of one count of aggravated assault contrary to s. 268(2) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 (“Code”). The judge found that he had stabbed the victim twice. The assault was unprovoked. The stab wounds punctured the victim’s lung and lacerated his liver. If not for surgery, the victim would have died. 
        
On November 19, 2021, the judge sentenced Mr. Kehoe to five years’ imprisonment less time served. He also made ancillary DNA and firearms orders. The judge’s reasons for sentence are indexed at 2021 BCSC 2474.
        
Mr. Kehoe seeks leave to appeal his sentence. He acknowledges that the judge referenced s. 718.2(e) of the Code and Gladue principles, but maintains he erred in principle by failing to give them meaningful effect. If successful on appeal, he seeks a sentence of three to four years’ imprisonment less time served.
        
The Crown argues that the judge appropriately accepted its position that Mr. Kehoe’s Indigenous status should be given little weight on the basis that the nexus between his status and the offence was limited. In the Crown’s submission, the dysfunction in Mr. Kehoe’s life was related mostly to his non-Indigenous step-father’s behaviours rather than to Gladue factors.
        
In my respectful view, the judge erred in principle by relying on trial Crown’s submission that Gladue principles played a limited role in Mr. Kehoe’s case because of his disconnection from his Métis heritage, culture and community. I would therefore grant Mr. Kehoe leave to appeal his sentence, allow his appeal and impose a sentence of four years’ imprisonment less time served. I would not set aside the ancillary orders made by the judge.
Circumstances of the Offence
        
The circumstances of the offence are summarized at paras. 8–15 of the judge’s reasons for sentence. I will repeat only the essential facts. 
        
On the evening of August 24, 2018, Mr. Kehoe drank four to five beers with friends by the river in Chilliwack. He returned to his apartment at approximately 11:35 p.m. Several minutes later, he heard three young men, including the victim, playing loud music in the parking lot. 
        
Mr. Kehoe yelled and then threw eggs at the young men from his balcony. When that did not deter them, Mr. Kehoe went down to the external door of his apartment building and confronted them. After some pushing and shoving the young men walked away.
        
Mr. Kehoe returned to his apartment, retrieved a large kitchen knife and followed the young men. As he approached them from behind, two of the young men retreated. The victim, who was quite intoxicated, stayed on the sidewalk. He raised his hands with his palms facing forward. He posed no threat to Mr. Kehoe. Without provocation, Mr. Kehoe stabbed him twice, once in his chest and once in his side.
      Mr. Kehoe then proceeded towards the other two young men. They defended themselves and Mr. Kehoe ran back to his apartment.
     
The victim was taken to the hospital. The judge described his injuries and the surgeries that saved his life as follows:
     ... [The victim] suffered a traumatic right hemothorax (or punctured lung), a hemoperitoneum (or internal bleeding), a liver laceration, and leakage of injected medication into the surrounding tissue. He underwent surgery to repair the punctured lung and the lacerated liver. Without surgery, he would have died. He had a long course of recovery in hospital and after his release. Reasons for Sentence
      The judge began his reasons for sentence by noting that the maximum sentence for aggravated assault is 14 years’ imprisonment. He then explained that the Crown sought five years’ imprisonment less time served while Mr. Kehoe sought three years’ imprisonment less time served. 
      After summarizing the circumstances, the judge noted that no victim impact statement had been filed. He then set out the positions of the parties with respect to aggravating and mitigating circumstances. In response to Mr. Kehoe’s submission that he had taken responsibility for his actions, the judge commented that he had not done so until he was found guilty. 
      With the benefit of pre-sentence, psychological and Gladue reports, the judge next reviewed Mr. Kehoe’s prior life experiences and criminal record.
      At the time of sentencing, Mr. Kehoe was 30 years old. He had a troubled childhood. He was raised by his mother and step-father who lived a “partying” lifestyle. The family moved frequently following evictions due to Mr. Kehoe’s step-father operating marihuana grow operations. When he was about 12 years old, Mr. Kehoe began lying, stealing, bringing drugs into the home and perhaps taking drugs out of the home and selling them. He was tremendously negatively affected by the stabbing death of his step-brother in 2011.
      Mr. Kehoe had been involved in three long-term relationships. He had three daughters under the age of five with three different women. He was subject to no-contact orders with respect to two of the mothers of his children.
     
The judge summarized Mr. Kehoe’s criminal record as follows:
     The presentence report also sets out Mr. Kehoe’s prior criminal record. It indicates that he has a total of 33 prior convictions, both youth and adult, including six robbery‑related offences, four offences involving threatening, one weapons offence, and numerous breaches of court orders and conditional sentences, as well as parole violations.
      The judge noted that the author of the psychological report considered Mr. Kehoe to pose a “moderate risk of future violence” and required special strategies to manage that risk.
      The pre-sentence, psychological and Gladue reports all indicated that Mr. Kehoe intended to turn his life around. There was some evidence to suggest he could do so. He was qualified as an architectural sheet metal fabricator, was employable and had attended a second stage addiction recovery residence for nine months. He had been compliant with his recovery program but had relapsed in the summer of 2020 and March 2021.
      Mr. Kehoe submitted that the long-term goal of protecting society would be best achieved through his rehabilitation. The judge commented that “inherent in that submission is an acknowledgment that an un-rehabilitated Mr. Kehoe is a danger to society.”
      The judge next turned to s. 718.2(e) of the Code, which he noted requires judges to pay “particular attention to the circumstances of Aboriginal offenders” in the sentencing process. He also noted that Mr. Kehoe has Métis heritage on his mother’s side.  
      Of particular importance to this appeal, the judge cited two passages from this Court’s decision in R. v. Hamer, 2021 BCCA 297, namely that: (1) for s. 718.2(e) to apply, an Indigenous offender need not establish a causal link between systemic and background factors and the offence at issue: Hamer at par. 98; and (2) there was no evidence in Mr. Hamer’s case to show that his claimed Indigenous heritage played any role in his criminality: Hamer at para. 114.
     
The judge summarized the positions of the parties and his own views regarding the impact of Mr. Kehoe’s Indigenous heritage as follows:
     The Crown notes that none of the negative experiences in Mr. Kehoe’s youth were connected in any tangible way to his Indigenous heritage or the legacy of residential schools. The majority of the problems were occasioned by his stepfather’s lifestyle and connection to the drug trade. Further, Mr. Kehoe was not apprised of his Aboriginal heritage until recently.
     In response, Mr. Kehoe’s counsel submits that the net should be cast more broadly. Simply put, Mr. Kehoe’s mother is of Aboriginal heritage. Women of that heritage have poor outcomes in our society. I accept that submission and that I should consider systemic and background factors that have played a role in bringing the Indigenous person before the court and may have a mitigating effect on moral blameworthiness. …
     … [T]he Gladue report indicated many of the same unfortunate experiences from Mr. Kehoe’s youth as the presentence report and the psychological report. I have taken those factors into account, both as general background factors and factors to be considered under s. 718.2(e). I consider the nexus between Mr. Kehoe’s Aboriginal status and this offence to be limited.
      The judge then recited the purpose and principles of sentencing in s. 718 of the Code. Mr. Kehoe did not dispute that denunciation, deterrence and protection of the public were the primary considerations.
      Next, the judge cited this Court’s decision in R. v. Craig, 2005 BCCA 484 for the following propositions: the range of sentence for aggravated assault is between 16 months’ and six years’ imprisonment; unprovoked attacks with weapons belong at the higher end of this range; and consensual fights that escalate with resulting injury belong at the lower end: Craig at para. 10.
     
Mr. Kehoe relied on R. v. Billing, 2017 BCSC 1107. In that case, Justice DeWitt-Van Oosten (as she then was) imposed a sentence of three years’ imprisonment less time served on an Indigenous offender with a lengthy record who had been found guilty of stabbing the victim six times causing life-threatening injuries. The judge distinguished the case on the basis that Mr. Billing’s assault was not unprovoked. Rather, the victim had initiated an altercation and Mr. Billing responded with disproportionate force. The judge commented:
     I accept the Crown’s submission that in sentencing there is a substantive differentiation between cases involving an unprovoked attack and cases involving an altercation that proceeds too far. There is a common-sense basis for this distinction. In my opinion, society views an unprovoked knife attack on an innocent victim to be one of the most violent and shocking offences in our society. That circumstance is significantly different than the injury to a willing combatant where the altercation goes too far.
      Mr. Kehoe also relied on R. v. Sanghera, 2016 BCCA 251, in which this Court upheld a three-year jail sentence for an unprovoked aggravated assault. The judge distinguished the case on the basis that, unlike Mr. Kehoe, Mr. Sanghera had no criminal record and faced deportation as a result of his conviction and sentence.
     
Finally, the judge concluded that a five-year term of imprisonment was appropriate for Mr. Kehoe:
     I do not accept the defence submission that the appropriate sentence in this case is three years less time served. As described in Craig, an unprovoked attack with a weapon tends to result in a sentence at the higher end of the range. That high end is up to six years. …
     In my view, the public is best protected by imposing a sentence with the primary objectives being denunciation and deterrence of this offence. I accept the Crown’s submission on the appropriate length of sentence. I impose a sentence of five years’ imprisonment. Mr. Kehoe, you are entitled to credit for time in custody of 260 actual days at 1.5 days’ credit per day in custody.
     In my opinion, this sentence is commensurate with Mr. Kehoe’s culpability, while also giving him an opportunity to focus on his own rehabilitation. I am also hopeful that Mr. Kehoe will engage in a meaningful way with the available Indigenous programs, thereby supporting his rehabilitation and reintegration into society. Standard of Review
      Sentencing is a highly individualized process. Sentencing judges have “front‑line” experience, see and hear all the evidence and submissions in person, and are generally familiar with the circumstances and needs of the local community. As a result, sentencing judges have broad discretion to impose a fit sentence. Sentencing decisions are entitled to considerable deference and will only be overturned for good reason: R. v. Friesen, 2020 SCC 9 at para. 25; R. v. Sellars, 2018 BCCA 195 at para. 22.
      An appeal court can intervene to vary a sentence only if the sentence is demonstrably unfit or if the sentencing judge made an error in principle that had an impact on the sentence: Friesen at para. 26; Sellars at para. 22; R. v. Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64 at paras. 41, 44. Errors in principle include “an error of law, a failure to consider a relevant factor, or erroneous consideration of an aggravating or mitigating factor”: Friesen at para. 26.
      If a sentence is demonstrably unfit or the sentencing judge made a material error in principle, an appeal court must perform its own sentencing analysis to determine a fit sentence. The appeal court is to do so without deference to the existing sentence, even if that sentence falls within the applicable range. The appeal court must, however, recognize the expertise and advantageous position of the sentencing judge and defer to their findings of fact and identification of aggravating and mitigating circumstances (provided those findings are not affected by an error in principle): Friesen at paras. 27–28. Sentencing Principles
      The purpose and principles of sentencing were codified in 1996. In striving to protect society and contribute to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society, s. 718 of the Code identifies denunciation, deterrence and rehabilitation, among others, as important sentencing objectives.
      According to s. 718.1, the “fundamental principle” of sentencing is that a sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.
      Section 718.2 identifies a number of other important principles. Under s. 718.2(a), a sentence must be increased or reduced to account for any relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances. Under s. 718.2(b), similar sentences should be imposed for similar offences committed in similar circumstances by similar offenders. Sections 718.2(c), (d) and (e) promote restraint in sentencing. Gladue Principles
     
Given Mr. Kehoe’s Métis heritage, s. 718.2(e) of the Code has special importance. It provides: [A]ll available sanctions, other than imprisonment, that are reasonable in the circumstances and consistent with the harm done to victims or to the community should be considered for all offenders, with particular attention to the circumstances of Aboriginal offenders. 
[Emphasis added.]
      In R. v. Gladue, 1 S.C.R. 688, 1999 CanLII 679, and R. v. Ipeelee, 2012 SCC 13, the Supreme Court of Canada made clear that s. 718.2(e) is remedial and is intended to deal with the continuing crisis of over‑representation of Indigenous offenders in the Canadian criminal justice system: Gladue at para. 33; Ipeelee at para. 59.
      This crisis is driven by the alienation, poverty, substance abuse, lower educational attainment, lower rates of employment, and prejudice experienced by Indigenous people in Canada. Sentencing judges are to take judicial notice of how Canada’s colonial history and post-colonial assimilationist policies have translated into these terrible outcomes: Gladue at para. 83; Ipeelee at para. 60. These systemic and background factors do not excuse or justify criminal conduct. Rather, they provide the necessary context for understanding and evaluating case‑specific information during the sentencing exercise: Ipeelee at para. 83.
      Systemic and background factors affect the incidence of crime and recidivism for all offenders. However, as the Supreme Court recognized, the circumstances of Indigenous offenders are different from other offenders because many Indigenous people are “victims of systemic and direct discrimination” and “dislocation” and are “substantially affected by poor social and economic conditions”: Gladue at para. 68.
      The over‑representation of Indigenous people in Canada’s prison population is tied to broad societal issues. Nevertheless, the Supreme Court in Gladue and Ipeelee recognized that culturally attuned sentencing for Indigenous offenders has a role to play in addressing this crisis: Gladue at para. 65; Ipeelee at paras. 64–70; R. v. Mero, 2021 BCCA 399 at para. 68. 
      Accordingly, Gladue and Ipeelee transformed the approach to sentencing Indigenous offenders. As with all offenders, a judge sentencing an Indigenous offender must take a holistic approach to imposing a fit sentence that is proportionate to the seriousness of the offence and the moral blameworthiness of the offender: Ipeelee at para. 37. However, since the circumstances of Indigenous offenders are “significantly different” from those of non-Indigenous offenders, the judge must pay particular attention to two factors: 1.    The unique systemic or background factors that may have played a part in bringing the particular Indigenous offender before the courts; and 2.    The types of sentencing procedures and sanctions that may be appropriate for the offender in the circumstances given their particular Indigenous heritage or connection. See Gladue at para. 66; Ipeelee at para. 59.
      In considering systemic and background factors, the judge must take account of all the surrounding circumstances, including “the unique circumstances of the offender as an aboriginal person,” and display sensitivity to and understanding of the “difficulties aboriginal people have faced with both the criminal justice system and society at large”: Gladue at para. 81; Ipeelee at paras. 59–60, 75. 
      It is not necessary to establish a direct causal link between systemic and background factors and the offence at issue. How the complex interplay of historical factors impacted a particular Indigenous offender may be difficult or impossible to establish. Nevertheless, the specific systemic or background factors at play are critically important. They may help the court assess the moral blameworthiness of the offender or identify appropriate sentencing objectives: Ipeelee at paras. 81–83; Hamer at para. 98.
      As for the appropriate sanctions, while restorative sentences may be more appropriate for Indigenous offenders, applying Gladue principles will not necessarily lead to a reduced sentence. There is no automatic heritage-based discount: Gladue at para. 88; Ipeelee at paras. 71, 75; Mero at para. 73. Generally, the more serious or violent the crime, the more likely it will be, as a practical matter, that the terms of imprisonment will be the same for an Indigenous and a non‑Indigenous offender: Gladue at para. 33; R. v. Wells, 2000 SCC 10 at paras. 42–44; Ipeelee at paras. 84–85; Mero at para. 73.
     
That said, no offence is so serious that it negates the need for a sentencing judge to consider s. 718.2(e) of the Code and Gladue principles: Ipeelee at paras. 84–85. In fact, absent an informed waiver, sentencing judges have a duty to consider s. 718.2(e) and Gladue principles in every case involving an Indigenous offender: Gladue at para. 82. As the Court explained in Ipeelee at para. 87, a failure to do so constitutes an error in principle justifying appellate intervention: 
     The sentencing judge has a statutory duty, imposed by s. 718.2(e) of the Criminal Code, to consider the unique circumstances of Aboriginal offenders. Failure to apply Gladue in any case involving an Aboriginal offender runs afoul of this statutory obligation. As these reasons have explained, such a failure would also result in a sentence that was not fit and was not consistent with the fundamental principle of proportionality. Therefore, application of the Gladue principles is required in every case involving an Aboriginal offender, including breach of an LTSO, and a failure to do so constitutes an error justifying appellate intervention. Discussion
      Sentencing is a difficult process that often requires balancing competing principles and objectives. Will protection of the public be best achieved by a deterrent sentence or one focused on rehabilitating the offender? Where in the sentencing range does a particular offender belong when they have committed a serious offence but have a reduced level of moral blameworthiness? To what degree are aggravating features of the offence offset by mitigating circumstances?
      In many cases involving the sentencing of Indigenous offenders, Canada’s assimilationist policies have been so successful that the offender may be largely or completely disconnected from their Indigenous culture, community and support: Hamer at para. 115. In such cases, an obvious tension arises in the task of balancing (1) the well-known principle that it is not necessary to establish a direct causal link between systemic and background factors and the offence at issue with (2) the requirement that it is nevertheless necessary to “evaluate relevant information about the significance of a person’s Indigenous identity and the individual’s circumstances as an Indigenous person”: Hamer at para. 117. 
     
As with all of the challenges in the sentencing process, we rely on the wisdom and experience of the sentencing judge to strike the right balance. In R. v. Whitehead, 2016 SKCA 165, the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal helpfully observed:
     The link between systemic or background factors and moral culpability for an offence does not require a detailed chain of causative reasoning. Instead, the analysis is based on inferences drawn from the evidence based on the wisdom and experience of the sentencing judge…
     In applying this approach, sentencing courts must pay careful attention to the complex harm that colonization and discrimination have inflicted on Aboriginal peoples.
      In Hamer, there was nothing in the record to show that systemic or background factors had any impact on the self-identifying Indigenous offender’s life or his moral culpability. Mr. Hamer was informed by his mother that he was born from her relatively short and casual relationship with a man who had told her he was “part Cree”. Mr. Hamer’s biological father played no role in his life. The Gladue report writer was unable to confirm Mr. Hamer’s Indigenous heritage or community of origin. More importantly, the Gladue report writer was unable to comment on any potential intergenerational impacts which may have affected Mr. Hamer or his family members: Hamer at paras. 101–103.
      Hamer is a clear example of the principle that Gladue principles do not apply simply because an offender is Indigenous. Indigeneity is not related to criminality. Rather, it is the adverse impact of Canada’s colonial history and assimilationist policies, if any, on a particular Indigenous offender that matters. The fact that an offender is Indigenous obliges a sentencing judge to consider Gladue principles but does not establish whether and how those principles will apply.
      In this case, trial Crown invited the judge to conclude that Gladue principles should play a limited role because: •        
The dysfunction in Mr. Kehoe’s family home growing up related to his non-Indigenous step-father’s drug use and trafficking, not Gladue factors; •        
The family’s frequent moves were connected to Mr. Kehoe’s step-father’s activities rather than his mother’s status as a Métis person; •        
Mr. Kehoe and his mother’s feeling of being “somewhat disconnected” from their Métis heritage “seems like an understatement”; •        
Neither Mr. Kehoe, his mother nor his grandparents attended residential school; •        
Neither Mr. Kehoe nor his mother were raised with Indigenous cultural practices, “[s]o intergenerational dysfunction related to Gladue factors… don’t really seem to be at play here”; 
•        
Mr. Kehoe’s “substance abuse” and depression were related to his non-Indigenous step-father’s behaviours, not his mother’s background; •        
The breakdown of Mr. Kehoe’s family was due to his non-Indigenous biological father abandoning him and his non-Indigenous step-father’s behaviours, not Gladue factors; •        
Instability in Mr. Kehoe’s life was caused by his mother and step-father’s partying lifestyle and his step-father’s actions; •        
The death of Mr. Kehoe’s brother had “nothing to do with historical wrongs done to Indigenous people”; •        
Insofar as violence was normalized in the Kehoe household, it consisted of yelling, not physical violence, and there was no suggestion that Mr. Kehoe’s mother or her parents had ever been victims of violence in their lives; and •        
While the problems Mr. Kehoe experienced in his life were relevant to sentencing, “[t]hey’re just not particularly tied to Gladue factors.”
      I do not wish to be overly critical of trial Crown. Mr. Kehoe had committed a very serious offence and the application of Gladue principles was not as obvious as it would have been if Mr. Kehoe’s family had been directly affected by, for example, the “Sixties Scoop” or Canada’s operation of residential schools. But the position taken by the Crown was deeply flawed.
      The overall thrust of the Crown’s submission was plain: because Mr. Kehoe and his mother were disconnected from their Métis heritage, Gladue principles should play essentially no role in determining a fit sentence for Mr. Kehoe. Mr. Kehoe’s difficulties were related primarily to his non-Indigenous step-father’s behaviours, not his heritage. 
      This position is highly problematic for two reasons.
      First, as the Truth and Reconciliation Commission noted at pp. 1–3 of its summary report, “Honouring the Truth, Reconciling for the Future,” Canada developed and implemented “a coherent policy to eliminate Aboriginal people as distinct peoples and to assimilate them into the Canadian mainstream against their will.” Canada “pursued this policy of cultural genocide because it wished to divest itself of its legal and financial obligations to Aboriginal people and gain control over their land and resources.” Residential schooling was one of many tools Canada used to achieve its assimilationist objectives.
      As a consequence of Canada’s colonial history and assimilationist policies, many Indigenous people have become disconnected from their ancestral communities, cultures, and associated positive social structures. This disconnection has contributed to the social and economic marginalization of Indigenous people in Canada, including their disproportionate interactions with the criminal justice system. 
      Disconnection is one of the very harms associated with Canada’s colonial history and assimilationist policies that Gladue and Ipeelee seek to address. Accordingly, the Crown’s reasoning that Gladue principles should play a very limited role in this case because Mr. Kehoe was disconnected from his Indigenous culture, community and supports subverts the remedial purpose of s. 718.2(e) of the Code and penalizes Mr. Kehoe for the success of Canada’s destructive policies.
      Second, when determining whether and how Gladue principles applied to Mr. Kehoe, the issue was never whether he was disconnected from his Métis community, culture and supports. Rather, the issues were: (1) the role Canada’s colonial history and post-colonial assimilationist policies played in causing that disconnection; and (2) the role that disconnection played in his coming before the court.
      I also do not wish to be overly critical of the sentencing judge. He correctly: •        
Noted s. 718.2(e) of the Code; •        
Accepted Mr. Kehoe’s submission that Indigenous women tend to have poor outcomes in Canadian society; •        
Accepted Mr. Kehoe’s submission that he “should consider systemic and background factors that have played a role in bringing the Indigenous person before the court and may have a mitigating effect on moral blameworthiness”; •        
Cited this Court’s decision in Hamer for the propositions that Mr. Kehoe was not required to establish a causal link between systemic and background factors and the offence, and that it was nevertheless important to consider whether the evidence established that systemic and background factors played a role in his offending behaviour; and •        
Indicated that he was taking account of the “unfortunate experiences” from Mr. Kehoe’s youth “both as general background factors and factors to be considered under s. 718.2(e).”
      However, when I read the judge’s reasons for sentence generously, as a whole and in the context of the record, it is evident he adopted the Crown’s flawed reasoning. He accepted, without analysis, the Crown’s submission that there was a limited connection between Mr. Kehoe’s heritage and his offence. He also expressly accepted the Crown’s submission regarding the appropriate length of sentence. Both of these submissions were based largely and incorrectly on Mr. Kehoe’s disconnection from his Métis community and culture. The judge did not turn his mind to whether and how: (1) Canada’s colonial history and post-colonial assimilationist policies played a role in that disconnection and (2) the instability in Mr. Kehoe’s life may have been related to that disconnection.
      I have great respect for the privileged position, experience and wisdom of the sentencing judge and a full appreciation of the challenging circumstances he faced. Nevertheless, in my view, he erred in principle. In relying on the Crown’s submission that Gladue principles should play a very limited role because Mr. Kehoe is disconnected from his Métis community and culture, the judge erred in law and failed to consider the role Canada’s colonial history and assimilationist policies may have played in bringing Mr. Kehoe before the court.
      In my view, the judge’s error in principle was material to the sentencing exercise. I must therefore undertake the sentencing process afresh. Sentence
      I take no issue with the judge’s view of the seriousness of Mr. Kehoe’s offence. His actions were unprovoked, senseless, violent and put the victim’s life in danger. Given his record of criminal offending and the role that his substance use disorder has played in it, I accept the judge’s comment that “an un-rehabilitated Mr. Kehoe is a danger to society.”
      I also take no issue with the range of sentence identified by the judge. Craig establishes a range of 16 months to six years’ imprisonment for aggravated assault. Unprovoked attacks with weapons belong at the higher end of the range: Craig at para. 10.
      The issue is whether Gladue principles have a meaningful role to play in sentencing Mr. Kehoe. In my view, they do.
     
The author of Mr. Kehoe’s Gladue report noted that the following “Gladue factors” impacted Mr. Kehoe and his family: 1.    Substance abuse and addiction in [Mr. Kehoe]’s immediate family and by [Mr. Kehoe] himself. 2.    Loneliness, depression, anger, trauma, suicidal ideation when [Mr. Kehoe] started cutting himself as a teenager. 3.    Family dysfunction, disruption and breakdown from the time [Mr. Kehoe] can first remember until he was homeless on the streets as a teenager. 4.    Instability as demonstrated by [Mr. Kehoe]’s frequent moves, his periods of homelessness and his abandonment by his mother and stepfather. 
5.    The premature violent death of his brother Jamie due to street life involvement. 6.    Normalization of violence and neglect as demonstrated by his parents and experienced as a child so that [Mr. Kehoe] started using this as a method of survival for self-preservation.
      There is no question that Mr. Kehoe was raised in a dysfunctional household where substance abuse, anger, verbal abuse, emotional abuse and criminal activity were normalized. There is also no question that the instability in Mr. Kehoe’s childhood contributed to his substance use disorder and anti-social behaviours. 
      While Mr. Kehoe’s non-Indigenous step-father was primarily responsible for the dysfunctional environment that so adversely affected Mr. Kehoe’s childhood, an important question that arises is: Why was Mr. Kehoe in that environment?
      The judge correctly observed that “[w]omen of [Indigenous] heritage have poor outcomes in our society.” Some of those poor outcomes include social and economic marginalization, instability, vulnerability to living in abusive and dangerous environments and the development of mental health issues and substance use disorder. It is widely recognized that an Indigenous woman’s disconnection from a functional and protective Indigenous community increases her risk of experiencing these outcomes: see, for example, “Reclaiming Power and Place: The Final Report of the National Inquiry into Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women Girls,” Vol 1b. at 108, 143. 
      In this case, I do not find it difficult to infer that Canada’s colonial history and assimilationist policies played a role in bringing Mr. Kehoe before the court. That is because I do not consider it simply a coincidence that Mr. Kehoe’s mother (1) became disconnected from her Métis community and culture and (2) fell victim to the all too common plight of similarly situated Indigenous women across Canada. In the absence of policies specifically designed to disconnect Indigenous people from their communities, cultures and supports, Mr. Kehoe’s mother stood a much better chance of raising him in a stable and functional environment where his heritage was celebrated and where he would develop pro-social and community-oriented values.
      On a proper application of Gladue principles, I consider Mr. Kehoe to have a significantly reduced level of moral blameworthiness. As I see it, systemic and background factors contributed to Mr. Kehoe being raised in a dysfunctional environment which in turn contributed to his substance use disorder and criminal offending.
      I also consider it significant that Mr. Kehoe recognizes he needs to address his substance use disorder and has taken concrete steps to do so. The fact that Mr. Kehoe has had a couple of relapses is concerning, but slips and relapses are a normal part of the recovery process.
      The hardest sentencing decisions involve offenders who have committed serious offences but have a reduced level of moral blameworthiness. In this case, considering the aggravated nature of Mr. Kehoe’s offence as well as his criminal record, reduced level of moral blameworthiness and efforts at rehabilitation, I would impose a sentence of 4 years’ imprisonment less time served. I would not disturb the ancillary orders made by the judge.
      In my view, such a disposition would be adequate to address the primary sentencing objectives of denunciation, deterrence and protection of the public without unduly exacerbating the disproportionate rate of incarceration of Indigenous people in Canada. I, like the trial judge, hope that Mr. Kehoe will take advantage of the culturally appropriate programs available in Federal correctional facilities to continue his efforts at rehabilitation. Disposition
     
I would grant Mr. Kehoe leave to appeal his sentence, allow the appeal and sentence him to four years’ imprisonment less time served. I would not disturb the ancillary orders made by the judge. 
