./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/pe/sc/2023pesc4.html
        
Taylor Edward Cooke (“Cooke”) is charged that he operated a conveyance on August 6, 2020 in a manner that was dangerous to the public and, as a result, caused bodily harm to Ryan MacKinnon (“MacKinnon”) contrary to ss. 320.13(2) and 320.2(a) of the Criminal Code of Canada, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 [Criminal Code]. II.      BACKGROUND
        
Main Street in O’Leary, Prince Edward Island, is a straight, two-lane street divided by a solid yellow line. Traffic travels eastbound and westbound. Each lane is marked on the right-hand side by a white fog line. A sidewalk and streetlights run along the eastbound lane. And the street is lined with businesses, residences, parking lots, driveways, and other connecting streets. 
        
On August 6, 2020, Cooke was operating a motorcycle on Main Street. He was travelling in the westbound lane. It was after 11:00 p.m. Cooke observed the taillights of a vehicle ahead of him in the westbound lane. The vehicle eventually pulled over to the right-hand side of the street and stopped. The vehicle straddled the fog line in the westbound lane. MacKinnon and a friend were crossing the street in front of the stopped vehicle to get to the sidewalk. MacKinnon was struck by the motorcycle while it was overtaking the stopped vehicle and seriously injured. Cooke was later charged. III.     LAW 1.      Presumption and burden of proof
        
Cooke is presumed innocent of the offence. The burden of displacing that presumption rests with the Crown. It never shifts to the accused. In other words, Cooke has no obligation to prove anything. The Crown alone must prove the elements of the offence beyond a reasonable doubt. 
 
2.      Elements of the offence
        a)      Physical
        
The physical elements of the offence require the operation of a conveyance by an accused in a manner that is dangerous to the public having regard to all of the circumstances, including the nature, condition and use of the place where the conveyance is being operated and the amount of traffic which at the time is, or might reasonably be expected to be, at that place (R. v. Beatty, 2008 SCC 5 at para. 43; and R. v. Roy, 2012 SCC 26 at para. 28). There is no single exhaustive list of relevant factors. The question is whether the driving, when viewed objectively, is dangerous to the public in all the circumstances (Roy at para. 34). The focus must be the manner of driving – not its consequences (Roy at paras. 34 and 35; and Beatty at para. 46). A consequence, such as a collision or injury, has no bearing on whether the manner of driving in question is dangerous (Beatty at para. 46). It is the risk created by the driving that is relevant (Roy at para. 34). All of this requires a meaningful inquiry into the manner of driving (Roy at para. 35).
        b)     Mental
        
The mental element of the offence requires the conduct of an accused to be a marked departure from the standard of care that a reasonable person would have exercised in the same circumstances (R. v. Chung, 2020 SCC 8 at para. 14; Beatty at para. 43; and Roy at paras. 28 and 36). This modified objective standard means that a reasonable person is placed in the circumstances or position of the accused (Roy at para. 38). The conduct of the accused is compared to the conduct of a reasonable person (Chung at paras. 16, 24, and 27). This involves considering what a reasonable person would have foreseen and done in the same circumstances (Chung at paras. 16, 17, 23, 25, and 26). All of the circumstances – the full picture of what occurred – must be considered (Chung at paras. 24 and 27; Beatty at para. 43; and Roy at para. 39).
        
An analysis of fault in this context may benefit from asking two questions. First, whether a reasonable person, in light of all the relevant evidence, would have foreseen the risk and taken steps to avoid it if possible. Second, if so, whether the failure of the accused to foresee the risk and take steps to avoid it, if possible, was a marked departure from the standard of care expected of a reasonable person in the circumstances of the accused (Roy at para. 36; and Chung at paras. 14 and 24). These questions serve as a helpful reminder of the need to compare the conduct of the accused and the conduct of a reasonable person in the same circumstances. This is essential in order to determine whether the mental element of the offence is present (Chung at para. 24).
        
The presence of this fault requirement is critically important. Care must be taken to avoid extending the reach of criminal law to conduct that is not morally blameworthy. Carelessness or a mere departure in care while driving may support civil liability. A marked departure is necessary, however, in order to sustain criminal liability (Roy at paras. 30 and 37). While a matter of degree, the lack of care must be sufficiently serious to merit criminal punishment (Roy at para. 28; and Beatty at paras. 35 and 48). In other words, moral blameworthiness is present only when there is a marked departure from the care that a reasonable person would observe in all the circumstances (Beatty at para. 36).
        c)      Bodily harm
        
Bodily harm is defined in s. 2 of the Criminal Code to mean any hurt or injury to a person that interferes with the health or comfort of the person and is more than merely transient or trifling in nature. 
        d)     Causation
      The aggravating element of the offence – bodily harm – requires proof of causation. The dangerous operation of the conveyance must be a significant contributing cause, or a contributing cause outside the de minimis range, of the bodily harm. The two phrases – “significant contributing cause” and “contributing cause outside the de minimis range” – are synonymous (R. v. Nette, 2001 SCC 78 at paras. 71-72). The conduct of the accused need not, however, be the sole or predominant contributing cause of the bodily harm. It need only be a contributing cause that is significant or beyond the de minimis range (R. v. Maybin, 2012 SCC 24 at para. 14). Determining causation therefore involves both factual and legal inquiries (R v. Kippax, 2011 ONCA 766 at paras. 21-28). 
      Factual causation is an inquiry into how the victim suffered bodily harm in a medical, mechanical or physical sense and the contribution of the accused to that result (Nette at para. 44). The question is generally whether, “but for” the conduct of the accused, the bodily harm would have occurred (Maybin at para. 15). This factual determination has nothing to do with intention, foresight, or risk (Smithers v. R., 1977 CanLII 7 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 506 at p. 518). It is rooted in the facts of the case. Legal causation, on the other hand, questions whether the accused should be held responsible in law for the bodily harm (Nette at para. 45). It is grounded in legal considerations, including the fundamental principle that an individual without moral blameworthiness should not be punished by the criminal law (Nette at para. 45). In effect, legal causation is a narrowing concept which examines a wide range of factual causes and reduces them to causes which are sufficiently close or connected to the harm to warrant legal responsibility (Maybin at para. 16). Causation is therefore a determination grounded in the specific factual and legal context of each case (Maybin at para. 17).
      Contributory negligence is not recognized in criminal law (Nette at para. 49). Causation, as a requisite aggravating element of the offence, is focused on the conduct of the accused. However, other circumstances in the record may prevent a finding of causation and raise a reasonable doubt. For example, evidence showing that an accident or collision was unavoidable irrespective of the conduct of an accused would prevent a finding of factual causation (R. v. Alli, 2012 ONCJ 49 at para. 70). Similarly, an intervening act may be of such a nature that legal causation cannot be established (Maybin at para. 60). These concepts or considerations, when relevant, do not change the test for causation. The required standard remains unchanged: the dangerous conduct of the accused must still be a significant contributing cause of the bodily harm (Maybin at paras. 28 and 60). 3.      Proof beyond a reasonable doubt
      The standard of proof required of the Crown – proof beyond a reasonable doubt – is a high one. It falls close to certainty, although absolute certainty is not necessary. A finding grounded in probability, however, is not enough (R. v. Lifchus, 1997 CanLII 319 (SCC), 3 S.C.R. 320 at para. 36). Proof beyond a reasonable doubt falls in between, but it rests much closer to certainty than mere probability (R. v. Starr, 2000 SCC 40 at para. 242). A reasonable doubt is not imaginary or frivolous (Lifchus at para. 36). It does not rest on speculation or guesswork. It is not based on sympathy or prejudice (Lifchus at para. 36). Rather, a reasonable doubt is rooted in reason and common sense. It is connected by logic to the evidence at trial (Lifchus at para. 36). In the end, it is the presence or absence of evidence which determines whether the Crown has discharged its burden or whether a reasonable doubt remains. In short, the standard required of the Crown is an exacting one. 4.      Evidence in defence to the offence
      Evidence presented in defence to an offence requires consideration of the relationship between reasonable doubt and credibility (R. v. W. (D.), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 742). This is not a matter of deciding whether to believe the evidence of the Crown or the evidence presented by the defence. This type of either/or inquiry excludes the real and legitimate possibility that the whole of the evidence – both Crown and defence – may leave the court with a reasonable doubt. The court must remain mindful of whether, based on all of the evidence, including the evidence presented by and on behalf of the accused, it is left with a reasonable doubt.
      The lines of inquiry used to describe this relationship are not sacrosanct (R. v. S. (W.D.), 1994 CanLII 76 (SCC), 3 S.C.R. 521 at p. 533; R. v. Dinardo, 2008 SCC 24 at para. 23; and R. v. S. (J.H.), 2008 SCC 30 at para. 13). Context matters. In cases of dangerous driving, where objective elements are present, two inquiries are helpful: a)           
first, if the evidence of the accused is accepted and, based on that evidence, there is a reasonable doubt about whether the Crown has proven any one of the elements required for dangerous driving, then the accused must be found not guilty; and b)           
second, even if the evidence of the accused is not accepted, where, after considering that evidence by itself or together with the other evidence, there is a reasonable doubt whether the Crown has proven any one of the elements required for dangerous driving, then the accused must be found not guilty (R. v. Ibrahim, 2019 ONCA 631 at para. 63). These inquiries serve as an important reminder that the evidence presented by and on behalf of an accused is relevant to whether the Crown has proven each of the elements of dangerous driving beyond a reasonable doubt (Ibrahim at para. 61). Evidence about the state of mind of the accused, and any explanations offered by the accused, must be considered as part of all the evidence in these types of cases (Roy at para. 39; and Beatty at paras. 8, 43, 47, and 49). IV.     EVIDENCE
      Mindful of the direction that reasons are not required to refer to every finding or piece of evidence (R. v. R.E.M., 2008 SCC 51 at paras. 18 and 20; and R. v. H.S.B., 2008 SCC 52 at para. 8), the evidence presented by the parties – and accepted by the court – is summarized briefly. 1.      Admissions
      Certain admissions were made by the accused and filed pursuant to s. 655 of the Criminal Code (R. v Brookfield Gardens Inc., 2018 PECA 2 at para. 24). Cooke admitted that he was the driver of the motorcycle involved in the collision on Main Street on August 6, 2020 (Admission 1). Cooke also admitted that MacKinnon was the pedestrian struck in the collision (Admission 2). 2.      Evidence of the Crown
      Three friends who were in the company of MacKinnon before, and at the time of, the collision testified at trial. They had attended a local fitness gym on Main Street before leaving around 11:00 p.m. Two girls were in a vehicle and travelled westbound on Main Street. The two boys, which included MacKinnon, were jogging in front of the vehicle as a bit of a joke. It was a clear night. There was no traffic. The road surface was dry. Main Street was lit with streetlights. After passing the local gas station, the two boys decided that they would cross the street to the sidewalk and run home. The vehicle pulled over to the right side of the westbound lane and stopped. The vehicle straddled the fog line. The girls remained inside. MacKinnon walked back to the passenger-side window of the vehicle and passed his bag to one of the girls. MacKinnon turned back and walked in front of the vehicle. The two boys proceeded to cross the street to get to the sidewalk running along the eastbound lane of Main Street.
      MacKinnon was struck by a motorcycle as he crossed the street. The three friends described the collision as happening in a flash or split second. MacKinnon was seriously injured.
      There was no material challenge to this evidence. Given the very short period of time available for the three friends to observe the motorcycle, they were unable to offer any material evidence about its speed or manner of operation. In the circumstances, this was reasonable and absolutely no fault of the three friends.
      The Crown also called three residents of Main Street. One resident was out for a drive and travelling eastbound on the street when she encountered the collision. A second resident was in her home when she heard a motorcycle “wide open” and travelling westbound shortly before the collision. A third resident was also in his home when he saw a flash of light passing by his window shortly before the collision. He also testified that there were approximately thirty driveways and laneways connecting to Main Street.
      A woman sitting in her vehicle at the local coffee shop also testified that she observed a motorcycle travelling westbound on Route 142 at a very high speed and passing a pickup truck shortly before 11:00 p.m. A short time later, the woman also observed an ambulance travelling westbound. She left the coffee shop and returned home. The woman travelled westbound onto Main Street before she was directed around the location of the collision. When she was directed back to Main Street after the scene, she stopped and observed a motorcycle being loaded onto a truck. The woman stated on cross-examination that the motorcycle was similar to the one she had observed earlier travelling westbound on Route 142.
      This circumstantial evidence related to a motorcycle travelling westbound on Route 142 and Main Street was of limited value to the court. These witnesses were not in positions to provide more reliable evidence about the speed or operation of the particular motorcycle of the accused. However, the evidence was helpful in two more limited ways. First, it confirmed that Main Street was a street that also included private residences. Second, it confirmed that there was at least some traffic on Main Street at the relevant time.
      The doctor who treated the accused in the emergency department after the collision testified that, when obtaining a history from the accused about what happened, the accused stated that he was driving about 100 km/h when the collision occurred. According to the doctor, the accused was alert at the time and oriented as to time and place. This admission was not challenged in any material way on cross-examination.
      The Crown also tendered video evidence taken from several surveillance cameras facing Main Street. The videos capture activity on the street before and after the collision between the motorcycle and MacKinnon. Upon review, only the collision itself was missing from the video evidence. The evidence was nevertheless helpful to observe the vehicle and the motorcycle, and to confirm the amount of traffic that was actually at the place of the collision at the relevant time. Vehicles were present on Main Street in the minutes before the collision on August 6, 2020. 3.      Evidence of the accused
      The accused testified that the posted speed limits changed from 80 km/h to 60 km/h and then to 50 km/h as he travelled westbound on Route 142 and later Main Street. He did not recall looking at his speedometer at any point. The accused did not see any vehicles on the road until he observed the taillights of a vehicle travelling ahead of him in the westbound lane. He made this observation before passing by the local gas station. The accused later saw the vehicle slowing down and then stopping on the right-hand side of Main Street. He testified that he was focusing on the vehicle and did not see anything around the vehicle. The accused went to pull around the vehicle, saw two people in his peripheral vision, and then felt an instantaneous impact on the left side of his motorcycle. According to the accused, there had been no sign of anyone and he had no time to react to anything. The vehicle was just stopped on the side of the street. After the collision, the accused stated that he did not apply the brakes. The motorcycle coasted down Main Street before eventually coming to rest. It was leaking fluid.
      On cross-examination, the accused testified that he had no memory of any speed while operating the motorcycle on Route 142 and later Main Street. He said that he would have slowed down moving from the 80 km/h zone to the 60 km/h zone, but that his speed would not have been much different between the 60 km/h zone and the 50 km/h zone. In the words of the accused, he was not sure what speed he was travelling at the time. The accused did acknowledge that he noticed a vehicle travelling in the westbound lane ahead of him. He did not, however, adjust his speed at the time. The accused said that he was very surprised by the calculations that the motorcycle was travelling more than 100 km/h as it passed by the local gas station in the 50 km/h zone. According to the accused, he was “coasting along” as he passed the gas station. He stated that he was not accelerating, had let off the throttle, and was slowing down. The collision occurred a few seconds after he passed the gas station. The impact was described as instantaneous.
      The evidence of the accused was consistent with the video surveillance of the motorcycle as it passed by the local gas station on Main Street. At no point during the video does the brake light of the motorcycle illuminate. 4.      Expert evidence
      The Crown called evidence from two experts from the RCMP. They were qualified by the court without challenge from the defence. The reports from those experts were also admitted into the record with the consent of the defence. 
      Cst. Stevenson prepared a collision reconstruction report. Cst. Stevenson concluded that the motorcycle collided with the pedestrian one metre to the left of the centre line on Main Street in the eastbound lane. The operator of the motorcycle was travelling west. There was no physical evidence of braking on the road surface.
      Cst. Sanders prepared a speed analysis report. Cst. Sanders concluded that the motorcycle was travelling at a minimum average speed of 133 km/h when it passed by a video surveillance camera on the exterior of the gas station on Main Street on August 6, 2020. Cst. Sanders later performed the same calculations using the same video surveillance camera and a control vehicle passing by the same location on August 19, 2021. His opinion regarding the minimum average speed of the motorcycle – 133 km/h – shortly before the collision was unchanged. Cst. Sanders also prepared a video comparison report, together with a comparison video, using the surveillance video of the motorcycle on August 6, 2020 and the surveillance video of the control vehicle on August 19, 2021. This video was created to allow for the comparison of their speeds based on perception.
      This expert evidence was not challenged in any material way. While the defence emphasized that the speed calculation performed by Cst. Sanders was only an average, the methodology used to calculate that speed was not seriously contested. This is perhaps not surprising because its own expert used the same methodology to perform speed calculations on behalf of the defence – albeit for three intervals as opposed to the single interval calculated by the RCMP. The defence also challenged the precise area of impact determined by Cst. Stevenson and suggested, with some support from its own expert, that this area may in fact have been different. The court accepted the area of impact determined by Cst. Stevenson for at least three reasons. First, Cst. Stevenson was present on scene following the collision. Second, the expert retained by the defence did not provide an opinion on this point to the contrary but suggested only that the area of impact may have been different. Third, the defence expert used the area of impact determined by Cst. Stevenson for the purpose of his calculations and report.
      The defence called evidence from one expert. He was qualified by the court without challenge from the Crown. The report from that expert was admitted into the record with the consent of the Crown.
      Mike Reade, a forensic collision reconstructionist, prepared a report using the videos and measurements collected by the RCMP. Mr. Reade concluded that he was 95% confident that the motorcycle was travelling between 148 km/h and 111 km/h when it exited the view of the video surveillance camera on the exterior of the gas station on Main Street on August 6, 2020 (Exhibit D-2 at p. 20). At this point, according to Mr. Reade, the motorcycle was 32.85 metres (107.7 feet) from the area of impact identified by Cst. Stevenson (Exhibit D-2 at p. 20). This conclusion was not challenged in any material way.
      However, in his report, Mr. Reade also presented a number of statistical analyses based on multiple variables. Very little weight has been assigned to these statistical analyses. As Mr. Reade explained in his testimony, the nature of statistical analysis meant that a range of outcomes could be generated with 95% confidence; however, he was unable to say which particular outcome in that range is correct or true. Many of the variables used in the statistical analyses were also without foundation in the evidence of this particular collision. This lack of connectedness to the actual evidence in this case, when coupled with the limitations inherent in statistical analyses, meant that the court assigned very little weight to the statistical analyses performed by Mr. Reade.
      For example, following the statistical analysis for the react and stop scenario, Mr. Reade concluded that the average speed for a motorcycle to stop within the stopping distance range, and avoid a collision, was 50 km/h. The fastest speed where a collision could still occur was 77 km/h. The slowest speed was 33 km/h (Exhibit D-2 at pp. 19 and 20). These particular conclusions have no weight because the statistical analysis introduced a number of variables which had no foundation in the evidence. For example, the analysis introduced a stopping distance range (+/- 3 metres) when other calculations recognized that the stopping distance was 32.85 metres. That distance was based on the area of impact identified by Cst. Stevenson. Similarly, the analysis introduced a perception and reaction time of 2.0 seconds. However, according to Mr. Reade, that perception and reaction time reflected a situation where the unexpected object was motionless in dark clothing and there was no ambient lighting. Those were not the circumstances present in this case. As a final example, the analysis introduced stopping frictions of 0.4 and 0.95. However, according to Mr. Reade, the former is used to reflect moderate braking while the latter is used to reflect emergency or lock-up braking. Again, neither circumstance was present in this case.
      When the expert evidence is considered together with the admission by the accused upon arrival at the emergency department, the court finds that the accused was travelling 111 km/h when he passed the gas station on Main Street and was 32.85 metres (107.7 feet) from the area of impact. While the precise speed at the time of the collision is not known, the court accepts the admission made by the accused that he was travelling about 100 km/h when the collision occurred. These findings resolve the disagreement about the speed of the motorcycle in a manner which extends the benefit to the accused. 
V.      ARGUMENT
      Mindful of the direction that reasons are not required to refer to every argument presented by counsel (R.E.M. at para. 32; H.S.B. at para. 8; and Dinardo at para. 30), the main arguments by the parties are summarized briefly. 1.      Crown
      The Crown submitted that all the required elements of dangerous driving causing bodily harm had been proven beyond a reasonable doubt. According to the Crown, this was not an unavoidable accident. In support of its position that the manner of driving was dangerous to the public, the Crown relied on, among other things, the speed of the motorcycle, the presence of traffic on the street, the existence of residences and businesses on the street, and the number of entry points onto the street, including driveways, parking lots and other streets. In support of its position that the conduct of the accused was a marked departure from the standard of care that a reasonable person would have exercised in the same circumstances, the Crown pointed to, among other things, the observation of the vehicle ahead and then later stopped on the side of the street, the failure of the accused to look at his speedometer, the posted speed limit, the speed of the motorcycle, and the absence of evidence of braking. While the Crown did not contest that the accused was slowing down by going off the throttle, in the words of the Crown, the accused was still travelling at an “excessive” rate of speed when overtaking a stopped vehicle. As for the requisite elements of causation and bodily harm, the Crown argued that the uncontested facts and medical evidence spoke for itself.
 
2.      Defence
      The defence submitted that the offence of dangerous driving causing bodily harm had not been proven by the Crown. Two main arguments were advanced. First, the defence argued that the physical and mental elements of the offence were not established on the facts. According to the defence, there was a brief period of high speed before the motorcycle was slowing to an unknown speed at the time of the collision. The street was straight, the road surface was dry, traffic was very light, and it was after 11:00 p.m. The businesses on the street were closed. While the defence did not deny that the accused was not looking at his speedometer, the defence emphasized that the exact speed of the motorcycle at the time of the collision is still unknown. When all of the evidence is considered, the defence argued that the criminal standard for liability was not reached by the Crown. Second, the defence argued that evidence related to causation left a reasonable doubt. According to the defence, the evidence suggested that the accident was unavoidable. In other words, the circumstances were such that a collision could not have been avoided – regardless of the speed of the motorcycle. Among other things, the pedestrian was obstructed by the stopped vehicle, the pedestrian was wearing dark clothing, and the pedestrian was running out too close to the motorcycle. The defence argued that all of these circumstances, which occurred in just a few seconds, left a reasonable doubt as to whether the conduct of the accused caused the bodily harm in evidence. VI.     APPLICATION 1.      Dangerous to the public
      In order to satisfy the physical element of the offence, the manner of driving, when viewed objectively, must be dangerous to the public having regard to all the circumstances. The accused was operating a motorcycle after 11:00 p.m. on a main street in a rural municipality that was lined with businesses, residences, parking lots, driveways, and other connecting streets. The two lanes of the street were divided by a solid yellow line. Streetlights provided ambient light, and it was a clear night. The posted speed limit was 50 km/h. The location was preceded by a 60 km/h zone and an 80 km/h zone. Some traffic was present on the street, but it was light.
      The accused did not check his speedometer, did not adjust his speed when he entered the 50 km/h zone, did not adjust his speed when he observed the taillights of the vehicle travelling ahead of him in the same lane, was travelling more than 100 km/h in the seconds before the collision, and did not apply his brakes as he observed the vehicle stop on the right-hand side of street straddling the fog line. The accused let off the throttle and pulled out to overtake the vehicle. He was travelling about 100 km/h at the time of the collision.
      The court is satisfied, after reviewing all of the circumstances, that the driving of the accused was objectively dangerous to the public. Travelling more than 100 km/h on a main street in a rural municipality, where there the posted speed limit is 50 km/h, results in a real risk to the public. And, in a place like the one present in this case, that risk extends to other drivers, passengers, and pedestrians. While the exact speed of the motorcycle at the time of the collision cannot be precisely known, that does not prevent a finding that the physical element of the offence is present (R. v. Pyrek, 2017 ONCA 476 at paras. 38-39). The accused was not, as he suggested, just coasting along Main Street. He was exceeding the posted limit by a significant amount. Excessive speed in this context was dangerous to the public. 2.      Marked departure
      In order to satisfy the mental element of the offence, the conduct of an accused must be a marked departure from the standard of care that a reasonable person would have exercised in the same circumstances. 
      A reasonable person in these circumstances would have foreseen the risk of a collision (Chung at paras. 14 and 23). The risk of a person entering the street was also reasonably foreseeable in the circumstances. This was a main road lined with businesses, residences, parking lots, and driveways. Travelling along a main road at a speed that significantly exceeds the posted speed limit, after observing a vehicle ahead in the same lane and after observing that vehicle pull over to the right-hand side of the road and stop, is not comparable to the momentary mistakes that may be made by any reasonable driver, such as the mistimed turn taken in Roy or the rapid loss of awareness in Beatty. The excessive speed present in this case was not a momentary lapse in attention or judgment resulting from the “automatic and reflexive nature of driving” (Beatty at para. 34) or “[s]imple carelessness, to which even the most prudent drivers may occasionally succumb” (Roy at para. 37). A reasonable person would have foreseen that travelling at such an excessive speed along a main street in a rural municipality creates a very real risk of a collision occurring within seconds (Chung at para. 22). And that could reasonably be a collision with a vehicle or pedestrian in these circumstances.
      A reasonable person in these circumstances would have taken steps to avoid that risk (Chung at para. 24). A reasonable person would have adjusted their speed when entering the 50 km/h zone. A reasonable person would been travelling at or near the posted speed limit. A reasonable person would have been checking their speedometer. A reasonable person would have observed the vehicle travelling ahead in the same lane and adjusted their speed. A reasonable person would have recognized the hazard presented by the vehicle slowing and stopping on the right-hand side of the road, including the risk that individuals may be inside, outside, or exiting the vehicle. A reasonable person would have braked and not just let off the throttle. 
      The accused was travelling on the main street in a rural municipality at a speed that significantly exceeded the posted speed limit. He was travelling through the heart of O’Leary. The accused did not check his speedometer. He did not adjust his speed when the posted speed limit changed. He did not adjust his speed when he observed the vehicle ahead of him. In fact, the accused was travelling at an excessive speed after becoming aware that there was a vehicle ahead of him in the same lane. As the accused approached the vehicle, it slowed and then stopped on the side of the road. The accused did not brake. Instead, he let off the throttle.
      The court is satisfied, after reviewing all of the evidence, that the failure of the accused to foresee the risk of a collision, and take steps to avoid it, was a marked departure from the standard of care expected of a reasonable person in the circumstances (Chung at paras. 23 and 24). When compared to what a reasonable person would have foreseen and done in the circumstances, the conduct of the accused constitutes a marked departure from the norm (Chung at para. 29). 
3.      Bodily harm
      Bodily harm means any hurt or injury to a person that interferes with the health or comfort of the person and is more than merely transient or trifling in nature. MacKinnon suffered serious injuries in the collision (Exhibit C-10). His left leg was severed below the knee. He had multiple open fractures and soft tissue injuries in his lower right leg. His pelvis was fractured. And he suffered a significant laceration.
      The court is satisfied that the injuries suffered by MacKinnon constitute bodily harm. 4.      Causation
      In order to satisfy the aggravating element of the offence, causation must also be proven. The dangerous operation of the motorcycle must be a significant contributing cause of the bodily harm. After reviewing all of the evidence, the court is satisfied that, but for the dangerous operation of the motorcycle by the accused, the bodily harm suffered by MacKinnon would not have occurred. This was not, as the defence suggested, an unavoidable accident. This collision with a pedestrian crossing Main Street was a materialization of the danger created by the accused when he operated his motorcycle in the manner that he did. 
      The accused observed the change in the posted speed limit to 50 km/h but did not adjust his speed. He observed the taillights of a vehicle ahead of him but did not adjust his speed. The accused did not look at his speedometer. He was travelling more than twice the posted speed limit in the seconds before the collision. The accused observed the vehicle ahead of him slow down, pull over to the right-hand side of the westbound lane, and stop. The accused let off the throttle. There was no physical evidence of braking at the scene. At the time of the collision with MacKinnon, the accused was traveling about 100 km/h. Even the accused acknowledged, after watching the video surveillance from August 6, 2020 and hearing the evidence of the experts from the RCMP, that he was “surprised” by the calculated speed of the motorcycle. Causation has been proven in these circumstances.
      In support of its position on causation, the defence provided a number of cases for consideration by the court. 
      For example, the defence relied on R. v. Brogan, 2008 NSPC 42, to support the proposition that, when circumstances occur unexpectedly so that a driver – no matter how careful – cannot avoid the consequences, the accident is unavoidable. In those situations, a reasonable doubt is raised in relation to causation (Brogan at para. 117). However, in Brogan, there was no evidence that the accused was exceeding the speed limit (Brogan at para. 137) and no hazard or danger was presented to the accused in that case (Brogan at para. 139). This is contrasted with this case where the accused was travelling at an excessive speed – even after he observed the vehicle ahead of him in the westbound lane. The accused in this case was also presented with a hazard or danger on the road: he observed the vehicle slow and stop on the right side of Main Street. A reasonable person in the circumstances would have foreseen the risks presented by this hazard or danger and taken steps to avoid it.
      The defence also relied on R. v. Hall, 2004 CanLII 41168 (ONSC), in an effort to contrast the circumstances of that case with the evidence in this case. In that case, the view of the pedestrians was unobstructed and they were plainly visible to the oncoming vehicle. It was not a situation where the pedestrians “suddenly ran out in front of a motorist who did not have time to stop” (Hall at para. 73). Similarly, in this case, the accused had an unobstructed view of the vehicle that he observed slow down, pull over, and stop on the side of the street straddling the fog line. The street was illuminated with streetlights, and the two boys crossed the street in front of the running vehicle. While the accused testified that he had no time to react to anything, that risk was one created by the excessive speed being travelled by the accused.
      The defence distinguished the decision in R. v. Malkowski, 2015 ONCA 887, where it was argued – unsuccessfully – that the collision would have likely occurred in any event regardless of the speed of the accused. In that case, the accused was travelling 152 km/h in a zone with a posted speed limit of 50 km/h. A child was struck while running across the road. The Ontario Court of Appeal did not accept this submission because it ignored the fact that the accused “would not have been in the position he was in on [the road] when the victim started across the road had he not been driving at the speed he was travelling” (Malkowski at para. 23). According to the defence, this reasoning casts too wide of a net for criminal liability and is inconsistent with the decisions in Brogan and Hall. The court does not share that view.
      The dangerous driving of the accused was a significant contributing cause of the bodily harm suffered by MacKinnon. In these circumstances, it cannot be concluded by the court that the accused is without moral blameworthiness and should not be held responsible by the criminal law for his conduct. 5.      Evidence in defence to the offence and as a whole
      After weighing all of the evidence, including the evidence presented by and on behalf of the accused, the court is not left with a reasonable doubt. While the evidence of the accused was accepted on a number of points, the Crown has proven the required elements of the offence beyond a reasonable doubt (Ibrahim at paras. 61 and 63). In his evidence, the accused made a number of statements which actually supported the conclusion that the operation of the motorcycle was objectively dangerous to the public and that the manner of driving by the accused constituted a marked departure from the standard of care that a reasonable person would have exercised in the same circumstances. This explanatory evidence of the accused was considered as part of all the evidence before the court in order to determine whether the Crown had proven the offence beyond a reasonable doubt (Roy at para. 39; and Beatty at paras. 8, 43, 47, and 49). VII.    CONCLUSION
      For these reasons, the court is satisfied, upon considering the evidence as a whole, that the Crown has proven the elements of the offence – physical, mental, and aggravating – beyond a reasonable doubt. The accused is convicted of the offence contrary to ss. 320.13(2) and 320.2(a) of the Criminal Code.
