./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/kb/2023abkb26.html
              Nickolas Donovan Ellis (“Mr. Ellis” or the “Accused”) is charged on a 17 count Amended Indictment with fraud, use or trafficking in forged documents, identity fraud (personation) and falsely representing himself to be a peace officer.
              The Crown alleges that from February 2016 to March 2019, Mr. Ellis engaged in an elaborate scheme in which he presented several investment opportunities to eight of his friends, neighbours, and co-workers.  The investment opportunities were interconnected with several investors participating in more than one opportunity.  Some but not all these investment opportunities related in some way to Mr. Ellis’ interest in sports memorabilia and his actual or purported business and personal connections with at least one well known retired National Hockey League (NHL) player.  The promoted investments all promised significant returns for minimal risk within a relatively short time. Some, but not all the investments purported to be “guaranteed” by Mr. Ellis.
              The Crown submits that all the investment schemes were fraudulent and were perpetrated by Mr. Ellis using several deceptive practices including the use of forged documents and false email accounts.
              The Crown asserts that because of the fraudulent conduct of Mr. Ellis, the Complainants have lost more than $1.7 million.  The Crown seeks convictions on each of the counts on the Amended Indictment.
              Mr. Ellis acknowledges permitting the Complainants to participate in a series of investment opportunities that were available to him during the relevant time.  However, he denies that he knowingly participated in any deceptive practices or any fraudulent activity.  Mr. Ellis submits that he may have been the victim of the fraudulent actions of others. 
              Moreover, Mr. Ellis submits that the Crown case is based on evidence that is largely circumstantial and it has not met its onus to prove the elements of the offences beyond a reasonable doubt. Mr. Ellis seeks an acquittal on each of the counts on the Amended Indictment.
              One of the counts on the Amended Indictment is unrelated to the investment schemes.  That count charges that Mr. Ellis submitted claims for reimbursement of expenses to his employer and that those expenses were fraudulent. Mr. Ellis denies that the claims were fraudulent.
              I conclude that the investment opportunities presented by Mr. Ellis were a house of cards built on a foundation of deception.  None of the investment opportunities were real and all were designed to generate substantial funds for Mr. Ellis at the expense of the investors.  For the reasons that follow, I find Mr. Ellis:
•         Guilty on each of the eight counts of fraud over $5,000 (counts 1, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 12 and 13),
•         Guilty on three counts of use or trafficking in a forged document (counts 19, 21 and 23),  
•         Guilty on three counts of identity fraud (counts 18, 20 and 22) and 
              I find Mr. Ellis not guilty:
•         On the single count of attempted fraud over $5,000 (count 7), and
•         On the single count of fraud under $5,000 (count 15)
•         On the single count of falsely representing himself to be a peace officer (count 24)  
    II.            Legal Principles 
a)      Burden of Proof
          The starting point in any criminal trial is that the accused is presumed innocent until proven guilty.  This means that a conviction can only be entered if the Crown has tendered sufficient evidence to prove the guilt of Mr. Ellis beyond a reasonable doubt.  The burden remains on the Crown throughout the trial; it never shifts to the defence.  Conversely, if a reasonable doubt exists as to the guilt of Mr. Ellis, he must be acquitted.  
          The Supreme Court of Canada in R v Lifchus, 1997 CanLII 319 (SCC), 3 SCR 320 and in R v Starr, 2000 SCC 40, explained that a reasonable doubt is a doubt that is based on reason and common sense that is logically connected to the evidence, or the absence of evidence.  It is not a doubt that is based on sympathy or prejudice toward or against anyone. Proof beyond a reasonable doubt necessarily requires a higher level of proof than probable guilt, but it does not require proof to an absolute certainty.  It does not require proof beyond any doubt, but rather proof beyond a doubt that is not imaginary or frivolous.  
b)     Circumstantial Evidence
          The Crown relies on circumstantial evidence to prove some of the elements of the offences charged.  In this regard, the Crown submits that the totality of the evidence, when properly assessed, permits inferences to be made to support a finding of guilt on each of the counts on the Amended Indictment.
          The Supreme Court of Canada in R v Villaroman, 2016 SCC 33 (Villaroman) provided guidance in relation to circumstantial evidence. The Court explained the relationship between proof by circumstantial evidence and the requirement of proof beyond reasonable doubt. Villaroman makes it clear that the Court must consider whether any inference urged by the Crown is the only reasonable inference that may be drawn from the circumstantial evidence. The Crown must negative other “reasonable possibilities”; it does not, however, need to negative “every possible conjecture ... which might be consistent with the innocence of the accused”: Villaroman at para 37. The Supreme Court also noted that “inferences must be reasonable given the evidence and the absence of evidence, assessed logically, and in light of human experience and common sense”: para 36. Alternative inferences must be reasonable and rational, not just possible: R v Lazzaro, 2016 ABCA 353 at para 8, citing R v Dipnarine, 2014 ABCA 328.
          When assessing circumstantial evidence, it is important to consider the totality of the objective facts proven by the evidence along with the absence of evidence. “A gap in the evidence, or an absence of evidence, may support a reasonable inference other than guilt”: R v Bjornson, 2018 ABCA 282 at para 22 (Bjornson). An accused is not required to provide explanations other than guilt, as this wrongly puts an obligation on an accused to prove facts, and “is contrary to the rule that whether there is a reasonable doubt is assessed by considering all the evidence”: Bjornson at paras 22-23; R v King 2020 ABCA 425 at para 30.
          In R v Lehner, 2020 ABCA 248 at paras 28 and 29, the Court of Appeal provided a useful summary of these principles:
… Villaroman is an excellent reminder to a trier of fact about too readily drawing inferences of guilt by overlooking reasonable alternative inferences. The trier of fact is mandated to consider other plausible theories and other reasonable possibilities that are inconsistent with guilt. The Crown may need to negative those reasonable possibilities, but certainly does not need to negative every possible conjecture which might be consistent with the innocence of the accused. 
Although the line between plausible theory and speculation is not always easy to draw, the basic question is whether the circumstantial evidence, viewed logically and in light of human experience, is reasonably capable of supporting an inference other than the guilt of the accused.  ...   It was noted in Villaroman that “‘[c]ircumstantial evidence does not have to totally exclude other conceivable inferences’; that the trier of fact should not act on alternative interpretations of the circumstances that it considers to be unreasonable; and that alternative inferences must be reasonable, not just possible”: at para 42, citing R v Dipnarine at paras 22 and 24-25.
          Where the criteria in Villaroman are properly applied, circumstantial evidence can be used to prove one or more of the elements of an offence, including that the accused person before the court was the person who committed the offence: R v Hassan Ali, 2021 ABCA 21; R v Eide, 2021 ABCA 70; R v Habte, 2020 ABCA 476, R v Matchee 2019 ABCA 5; R v Brazeau, 2018 ABCA 170.  
c)      Elements of Fraud – s 380
          Eight of the counts on the Amended Indictment charge that Mr. Ellis committed fraud over $5,000 contrary to s 380(1)(a) of the Criminal Code, RSC 1985, c C-46 (the Code), which provides:  
380. FRAUD — (1) Every one who, by deceit, falsehood or other fraudulent means, whether or not it is a false pretence within the meaning of this Act, defrauds the public or any person, whether ascertained or not, of any property, money or valuable security or any service,
(a) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding fourteen years, where the subject-matter of the offence is a testamentary instrument or the value of the subject-matter of the offence exceeds five thousand dollars; or
          The actus reus of the offence is described by the Supreme Court in R v Olan 1978 CanLII 9 (SCC), 2 SCR 1175 and in R. v Théroux, 1993 CanLII 134 (SCC), 2 SCR 5 at para 16:
(i)                 the offence has two elements: dishonest act and deprivation;
(ii)              the dishonest act is established by proof of deceit, falsehood or "other fraudulent means”;
(iii)            the element of deprivation is established by proof of detriment, prejudice, or risk of prejudice to the economic interests of the victim, caused by the dishonest act.
          The concept of “other fraudulent means” in s 380(1) was discussed in R v Zlatic 1993 CanLII 135 (SCC), 2 SCR 29 at para 31 where the Court noted that this category of fraud has been used to support convictions in several situations where deceit or falsehood cannot be shown. These situations have included the use of corporate funds for personal purposes, non-disclosure of important facts, exploiting the weakness of another, unauthorized diversion of funds, and unauthorized arrogation of funds or property. Zlatic cited the following authorities in support of those examples: R v Black and Whiteside, 1983 CanLII 3493 (ON CA); R v Shaw, 1983 CanLII 3584 (NB CA); R v Wagman, 1981 CanLII 3122 (ON CA); R v Rosen, 1979 CanLII 2867 (ON SC), R v Côté and Vézina (No. 2), 1982 CanLII 3874 (QC CA); R v Hansen, 1983 ABCA 68 (CanLII); R v Geddes, 1979 CanLII 2854 (MB CA); R v Currie & R v Bruce, 1984 CarswellOnt 1237 (ON CA), and R v Kirkwood, 1983 CanLII 1953 (ON CA).  
          In R v Iyer, 2020 ABCA 439 at para 46, the Court explained what is meant by “deprivation” within the meaning of s 380:
The element of deprivation is satisfied on proof of detriment, prejudice, or risk of prejudice to the economic interests of the victim. It is not essential that there be actual economic loss as the outcome of the fraud: Olan at 1182. Deprivation can also exist where an opportunity to prevent loss is taken away: see R v Gaetz, 1992 CanLII 2509 (NS CA), affirmed 1993 CanLII 82 (SCC), [1993] 3 SCR 645; or, where an opportunity to profit is extinguished: see R v Kirkwood, 1983 CanLII 1953 (ON CA).
          The mens rea of the offence is described by Justice McLachlin (as she then was) in Théroux at para 24:
The mens rea would then consist in the subjective awareness that one was undertaking a prohibited act (the deceit, falsehood or other dishonest act) which could cause deprivation in the sense of depriving another of property or putting that property at risk. If this is shown, the crime is complete. 
          Justice McLachlin also noted that no defence arises based only on the accused’s hope that the deprivation would not take place, or that the accused may have felt there was nothing wrong with what he or she was doing.
d)     Elements of Use or Trafficking in Forged Documents – s 368
          Three of the counts on the Amended Indictment charge that Mr. Ellis used or trafficked in forged documents contrary to s 368(1)(a) of the Code that provides:
368.(1) Everyone commits an offence who, knowing or believing that a document is forged,
(a)   uses, deals with or acts on it as if it were genuine.
          To establish the offence the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the document was forged, that the accused knew it was forged and that he or she used, dealt with or acted on the document as if it were genuine.  The offence does not require an intent to defraud or to cause prejudice: R v Valois, 1986 CanLII 55 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 278, at pp. 282-3; R v Sebo 1988 ABCA 200 (CanLII) (leave to appeal refused S.C.C.A. No. 309); Manning, Mewett & Sankoff, Criminal Law, 5th ed (LexisNexis) at ¶23.28-23.58.
e)      Elements of Personation (Identity Fraud) – s 403
          Three of the counts on the Amended Indictment charge that Mr. Ellis personated three different persons contrary to s 403(1) of the Code which provides:
403. IDENTITY FRAUD — (1) Everyone commits an offence who fraudulently personates another person, living or dead,
(a) with intent to gain advantage for themselves or another person;
(b) with intent to obtain any property or an interest in any property;
(c) with intent to cause disadvantage to the person being personated or another person; or
(d) with intent to avoid arrest or prosecution or to obstruct, pervert or defeat the course of justice.
(2) CLARIFICATION — For the purposes of subsection (1), personating a person includes pretending to be the person or using the person’s identity information — whether by itself or in combination with identity information pertaining to any person — as if it pertains to the person using it.
          The actus reus of the offence is that the accused person fraudulently personated a person.  This can include an accused person pretending to be the person – s 403(2).  It is not necessary that anything actually be obtained as a result of the personation and the offence can occur with or without an improper use of another person’s identity information. However, the person who is personated must be a real person, living or dead: Manning, Mewett & Sankoff at ¶23.134.
          The mens rea element is specified in subsections (a) to (d), and can be made out in any one of those ways. 
f)       Elements of Impersonating a Peace Officer – s 130
          Mr. Ellis is charged with one count of impersonating a peace officer contrary to s 130 of the Code which provides that:
130. PERSONATING PEACE OFFICER — (1) Everyone commits an offence who
(a) falsely represents himself to be a peace officer or a public officer; or ...
          To obtain a conviction under this section the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused person made representations that he or she was a peace officer when in fact that was not the case.  
          The mens rea element requires that the Crown prove that the accused person intended to make the representations knowing that they were false.
g)      Assessment of Conflicting Evidence
          Mr. Ellis does not have an onus to prove anything.  For this reason, he was not required to testify.  Despite this, he elected to testify and provide the Court with evidence relating to his involvement with the events that give rise to the allegations against him.  His evidence conflicts in many material ways with the evidence tendered by the Crown.  It is therefore necessary to assess Mr. Ellis’ evidence in accordance with the direction of the Supreme Court in R v W(D), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), 1 SCR 742 (W(D)), as explained by R v Ryon, 2019 ABCA 36 at para 51 and R v Achuil, 2019 ABCA 299 at para 18.  This direction is as follows:     
(i) The burden of proof is on the Crown to establish the accused’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt and that burden remains on the Crown so that the accused person is never required to prove his innocence or disprove any of the evidence led by the Crown.
(ii) In that context, if the accused’s evidence denying complicity or guilt (or any other exculpatory evidence to that effect) is believed, or even if not believed still leaves the jury with a reasonable doubt that it may be true, then the jury is required to acquit.
(iii) While I must attempt to resolve conflicting evidence bearing on the guilt or innocence of the accused, a trial is not a credibility contest requiring me to decide that one of the conflicting versions is true. If, after careful consideration of all the evidence, I am unable to decide whom to believe, I must acquit. 
(iv) Even if I completely reject the accused’s evidence, I may not simply assume the Crown’s version of events must be true. Rather, I must carefully assess the evidence I do believe and decide whether that evidence persuades me beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused is guilty. Mere rejection of the accused’s evidence cannot be taken as proof of the accused’s guilt.
          Mr. Ellis testified that he used the monies invested by the Complainants to legitimately pay the persons who were required to be paid so that the investments could proceed.  In addition, Mr. Ellis expressly denied most or all the allegations that have been made against him by the Crown.  
          To properly understand the evidence of Mr. Ellis and to put it in the proper context, it is important to consider the nature of the allegations that have been made against Mr. Ellis.  For this reason, before I address the details of the evidence of Mr. Ellis, I will begin by identifying the individual investors and the amounts that they contributed to the investments. Thereafter, I will assess the evidence of Mr. Ellis and determine if he should be believed or whether, even if not believed, his evidence, along with the other exculpatory evidence, gives rise to reasonable doubt.
 III.            Some Background on the Investors
a)      The Investors
          Each of the investors had known Mr. Ellis for a relatively short period of time prior to making their investment.  Some met Mr. Ellis for the first time when he moved to a residential community adjacent to the Northern Bear Golf Course south of Sherwood Park, Alberta in or about 2015.  Other investors met Mr. Ellis when he began his employment with Wainbee Canada Inc (“Wainbee”) in September 2015 or when Mr. Ellis became the General Manager of Barcol Doors and Windows Ltd (Barcol) in September 2017.  
                                                        i.            Randy Blackburn
          Mr. Blackburn met Mr. Ellis in September 2015 when Mr. Ellis was hired by Wainbee as the VP for Saskatchewan and Alberta. Mr. Blackburn was a long-term employee of Wainbee, having worked there for more than 20 years.  Very soon after Mr. Ellis arrived at Wainbee, he and Mr. Blackburn became friends.  The friendship continued even after Mr. Ellis left Wainbee in July 2016.  Mr. Blackburn described Mr. Ellis as his best friend.
                                                      ii.            Terry McLean
          Mr. McLean is a millwright and businessman who owned and operated HTS Hydraulic Technical Service Inc (HTS) for 30 years until he sold the business to Wainbee effective December 31, 2015.  Mr. McLean worked closely with Mr. Ellis in closing the transaction and for a period of six months after the sale of the business.  This was to ensure a smooth transition of the HTS business operations into Wainbee and also to ensure the successful integration of the HTS staff into Wainbee.  During their time working together Mr. Ellis and Mr. McLean also developed a good friendship.
                                                    iii.            Boris Makowecki
          Mr. Makowecki retired in 2014 from his position as Executive Vice President of Hyduk Energy Services Inc, a publicly traded corporation.  Prior to that he was involved in several other business ventures.  Since his retirement he has managed investments through his private holding companies including Makow Properties Corp Ltd (Makow Properties).
           Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Ellis were neighbours, both residing at the Northern Bear Golf Course.  Mr. Makowecki began residing at Northern Bear in about 2014 and Mr. Ellis and his wife Jennifer began living there in or about 2015. Mr. Ellis and Mr. Makowecki also developed a close friendship and spent time golfing, socializing, fishing, and going to hockey games.
                                                    iv.            Darcy Deleeuw
          Mr. Deleeuw is a businessperson who has owned and operated Road Gear Sportswear Ltd. for the last 30 years.  He also lived at the Northern Bear Golf Course and was a neighbour of both Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Ellis.  Mr. Deleeuw also developed a friendship with Mr. Ellis that involved golfing, fishing, and socializing.
                                                      v.            Kent Halliday
          Mr. Halliday was the director of marketing for ZCL Composites in Edmonton.  In March or April 2017, he was introduced to Mr. Ellis through two of his golf partners, Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Deleeuw.  Mr. Halliday and Mr. Ellis also became friends. 
                                                    vi.            Stewart Lee
          Mr. Lee worked for Steelcraft Door Products Ltd (Steelcraft) and its subsidiary, Barcol. He was an 11-year employee and occupied the position of human resources manager.  Mr. Lee met Mr. Ellis when Mr. Ellis was hired in September 2017 as the General Manager of Barcol.  Mr. Lee’s relationship with Mr. Ellis was that of a co-worker.
                                                  vii.            Robert Hawman  
          Mr. Hawman had a career in the military which he left in 2017.  Mr. Lee had been one of his former colleagues in the military and encouraged Mr. Hawman to consider Barcol as an employment opportunity.  This led to a meeting with Mr. Ellis and resulted in Mr. Hawman joining Barcol in November 2017.  Like Mr. Lee, Mr. Hawman’s relationship with Mr. Ellis was purely as a co-worker.
                                                viii.            Dusan Nikicevic
          Mr. Nikicevic was a very long serving employee of Steelcraft, having started his career with that company after receiving an accounting diploma from NAIT in 1983.  By 2017 he had been transferred to Barcol as the Controller and for a time was the interim General Manager of Barcol.  When Mr. Ellis joined Barcol in September 2017 as General Manager, Mr. Nikicevic began reporting to him.  Mr. Nikicevic’s relationship with Mr. Ellis was that of a co-worker who reported to Mr. Ellis.
b)     The Investment Contributions
          Each of the investors contributed substantial amounts to the projects that were promoted by Mr. Ellis.  The earliest and largest of the projects, in terms of the amount invested was the Dynasty Project in which Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki invested a total of more than $1.189 million.  
          The Reebok Jersey Program was the second in time of the investment opportunities and was also the second largest of the investments.  Six of the investors participated in the Reebok Jersey Program.  A total of more than $319,000 was invested in this program by these investors. 
          The remaining investment opportunities came later in time and involved investments by only one investor each.  For example, Mr. Nikicevic was the only investor in the Bridge Financing Project.  Mr. Halliday was the only investor in the Barcol Acquisition project and Mr. Makowecki was the only investor in the Telus and Gretzky projects.  With one small exception, all of the funds invested were lost.
          A summary of the amounts invested is as follows:
 



   
 Dynasty   Project 
 Reebok Jersey Program 
 Bridge Financing 
 Barcol Acquisition 
 Telus/ Gretzky 
   Total 


 Blackburn 
   193,735 
   
   
   
   
   193,735 


 McLean 
   399,102 
      145,210 
   
   
   
   544,312 


 Makowecki 
   596,409 
        45,625 
   
   
 125,274 
   767,308 


 Deleeuw 
   
       39,375* 
    
   
   
   39,375* 


 Halliday 
   
        39,375 
   
   49,475 
   
     88,850 


 Lee 
   
        25,000 
   
   
   
     25,000 


 Hawman 
   
        25,000 
   
   
   
     25,000 


 Nikicevic 
   
   
   40,250 
   
   
     40,250 


 Total 
 1,189,246 
       319,585 
   40,250 
    49,475 
 125,274 
 1,723,830 



                        *Mr. Deleeuw received a return of $21,165 from Mr. Ellis in May 2018
 IV.            The Evidence of Mr. Ellis
          Mr. Ellis is an intelligent and well-educated man.  He has a university education, including an Executive MBA from Queen’s University.  Mr. Ellis is also an experienced business leader with a history of involvement in mergers and acquisitions, although as he explained, most major business transactions in the modern era involve acquisitions rather than mergers.  His experience included participating in a 2009 acquisition that had a value of approximately $1 billion. 
          Mr. Ellis was highly regarded by those he worked with, including some of the Complainants.  For example, Mr. Blackburn worked with Mr. Ellis at Wainbee and described him as a high energy person with many good business ideas.  He was impressed by the work that Mr. Ellis had done for Wainbee. 
          Mr. Ellis acknowledges having received more than $1.7 million from the Complainants in relation to investment opportunities.  Mr. Ellis testified that on receipt of those monies “... I gave it to the people that it needed to go to”, meaning that he did not improperly keep the funds for his personal use.
          Mr. Ellis acknowledges that most of the investors have not received a return of their investment funds.  However, Mr. Ellis denies knowingly participating in any fraudulent activity.
a)      The Dynasty Project
          Mr. Ellis testified that he was approached by a software developer by the name of “Dean” who was attempting to raise “seed money” for the further development and sale of an “app” technology which was to be licenced. The technology involved a mechanism to communicate via a subscription service with athletes before and after games. These chats or streams were intended to provide the customer with a more in-depth understanding of the athlete at different times.  The plan for the technology included a partnership with sports leagues.  
          Mr. Ellis testified that he met “Dean” in the following manner:
I met him through associates of my ex-wife who was in the computer world --- nothing like that.  She didn’t design anything.  She was actually an IT person that fixed computers. A friend of a friend of hers – and she told me that maybe I should talk to this person.  So I went into Sherwood Park and met this person at Starbucks on Wye Road.  And they sort of explained it to me. There was someone else with him that day which I never met again.  And he kind of rolled it out to me and explained to me.  Showed me a lot of stuff on a computer screen that didn’t completely make sense to me but I was understanding what they were telling me and where they wanted to go and what they wanted to be.
          Mr. Ellis testified that he could not remember “Dean’s” last name.  Mr. Ellis did not testify as to when the Starbucks meeting took place.
          Mr. Ellis testified that after his meeting with “Dean”, he was contacted by Tom and Frank Tiebert.  The Tieberts represented themselves to be lawyers from Ontario who were acting on behalf of the Dynasty Project.  Their work included attempts to get “sign off” from the leagues.  Mr. Ellis’ first contact with the Tieberts was via email, following which Mr. Ellis had many phone calls and emails from the Tieberts.  In addition, he and Mr. McLean met in person with Tom Tiebert in Edmonton at a Starbucks Restaurant for a short visit.  Mr. Ellis testified that he has never met Frank Tiebert.
          Mr. Ellis acknowledged receiving from each of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki substantial funds for investment in the Dynasty project.  The plan was that each of the investors would receive very large returns (millions or billions of dollars) on the closing of the sale of the technology to Microsoft.  The closing was originally contemplated to take place within a short timeframe after the investments were made, but the closing was delayed on numerous occasions for the reasons given in emails from the Tieberts which Mr. Ellis passed on to the investors.  At various times the Tiebert emails represented that some or all of the funds for closing were in a trust account.  
          Mr. Ellis testified that there were several variations of the “app” that were being developed by the computer programmers, thus giving rise to three “different versions” of the technology.  He explained that they were “separate and different”.  He testified that Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki each invested in different variations of the app.
          Mr. Ellis denied that he sold the very same interest in the technology three different times to Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki, as suggested by the Crown. He testified:
Q.        Okay. And you never thought to disclose to the other complainants involved in different versions of the Dynasty Group that actually you had three versions of the Dynasty Group Partnership?
A.        I don’t know that it would be any of their business.
Q.        Well, don’t you think that it would be confusing in terms of what they understood that they owned?
A.        No.  They knew what they owned.  They knew that they owned that piece that was that property.
Q.        I am going to suggest to you that that’s nonsense, that’s just a fiction.
A.        I disagree with you 100%.
          Mr. Ellis testified that all his information regarding the Dynasty Project came from “Dean” and from the Tieberts.  He testified that he was just as frustrated as Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki that the project did not progress on the timeline originally anticipated.  He also shared their frustrations when meetings were delayed or cancelled.  However, he continued to have confidence in the legitimacy of the project.
          Banking records from his accounts at the Royal Bank of Canada (RBC) have been admitted by Mr. Ellis.  Specifically with respect to the Dynasty Project the banking records show that almost $1.2 million was deposited into Mr. Ellis’s RBC accounts by Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki.
          The Dynasty Project began in approximately February 2016.  Mr. Ellis testified that the project continued until approximately March 2019 when Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki just “stopped talking” to Mr. Ellis.  This was at the time when the investors made complaints to police and the fraud investigation began. The closing of the Dynasty Project had not taken place by that time.  Nor did the closing ever take place.
                                                        i.            Tieberts Request Investor Contributions
          During the first two and one half years of the project, many emails were sent by the Tieberts to Mr. Ellis asking for additional funds for various purposes in relation to the Dynasty Project.  Those emails were passed on by Mr. Ellis and funds were then provided by the investors to Mr. Ellis who then deposited the funds into one of his accounts at RBC.  Mr. Ellis testified that he received these monies but then passed the funds on to the Tieberts as he was required to do.  
          The Crown submits that the Tieberts were not real persons, and that Mr. Ellis was responsible for creating the Tiebert email account. The Crown also submits that Mr. Ellis was responsible for creating the email messages which he sent purporting to be the Tieberts, all as part of a fraudulent scheme to extract substantial additional contributions from the investors in the Dynasty Project.
          When testifying, Mr. Ellis forcefully denied that he created the Tiebert email account, and he also forcefully denied that he was the author of any of the Tiebert emails. 
          Mr. Ellis testified that he did not send any emails holding himself out to be Tom Tiebert.
          Mr. Ellis testified that he did not send any emails holding himself out to be Frank Tiebert.
          Mr. Ellis testified that he has no knowledge of whether his wife or any other person used his cell phone or any other device to send or receive email messages that might be relevant to this case.
                                                      ii.            The Scotiabank Account
          The Crown submitted that Mr. Ellis received large amounts of money from the investors in the Dynasty project, but that Mr. Ellis did not properly deal with those funds by passing them on to the Tieberts or other persons who were to be the proper recipients. 
          In partial response to those assertions, Mr. Ellis testified that in or about early 2017, he opened and maintained a bank account at Scotiabank (the “Scotiabank Account”).  Mr. Ellis testified that the Scotiabank Account held significant funds at times and that he used the Scotiabank Account for processing payments with respect to some of the investments that are the subject of this litigation.  
          Mr. Ellis testified that he couldn’t be sure but he “wanted to say” that he paid the Tieberts from this account.  He testified that he also paid the Tieberts funds in unconventional ways including cash drops, transfers of securities, the use of payday loans and by paying inflated purchase prices at a coin and stamp business in West Edmonton Mall (presumably with the excess funds being passed on by the merchant to the Tieberts).
          The Crown tendered extensive banking records from RBC, Scotiabank and credit card companies that been obtained by a Production Order.  In response to the Production Order, Scotiabank responded with affidavits disclosing the records that they held in relation to Mr. Ellis.  These records did not disclose any bank account as described by Mr. Ellis. 
          The Crown submits that the Scotiabank Account did not exist.
          Mr. Ellis insisted that the Scotiabank Account was real and that he used the account in relation to the investments that are the subject of the present charges.
                                                    iii.            Mike Bossy and the Dynasty Project
          Mike Bossy was a retired professional hockey player who passed away in the Spring of 2022.  Prior to his death, Mr. Bossy made several paid personal appearances at events organized by Mr. Ellis including a “Fins and Skins” golf and fishing event, a Barcol golf tournament in the summer of 2018 and an Edmonton Oilers hockey game.  Mr. Bossy was introduced to each of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki at one or more of these events. 
           Mr. Ellis testified that Mr. Bossy was never involved in any way with the Dynasty project.  An Agreed Statement of Facts confirms, among other things that “Bossy has never been involved in the ‘Dynasty Project’ or any form of software or social media development, either with the Accused or with any other person”. 
          Despite Mr. Bossy not being involved in the Dynasty Project, each of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki received communications from an email address, bossym573@*****.  The person sending the email messages represented that he or she was Mike Bossy and provided input regarding the Dynasty Project.  
          The Agreed Statement of Facts makes it clear that Mike Bossy did not know of and had never used the bossym573@***** email account.  As a result, messages from this email account from a person pretending to be Mr. Bossy were not actually from Mr. Bossy and in this way the messages were dishonest and deceitful.
          The Crown argues that the fake Bossy email account was fraudulently created and used by Mr. Ellis to further manipulate the investors and entice them to make ongoing investments into the Dynasty Project.
          Mr. Ellis testified that he did not create the fake Bossy email account.  
          Mr. Ellis testified that he did not use the fake Bossy email account to send messages to any of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean or Mr. Makowecki.
                                                    iv.            Bruce Geiger – Miller Thomson
          Bruce Geiger is a lawyer practicing in the Edmonton office of the law firm of Miller Thomson LLP.  Neither Mr. Geiger nor Miller Thomson LLP had any involvement with Mr. Ellis or with the Tieberts or with any of the events that give rise to the criminal charges against Mr. Ellis.
          Mr. Ellis testified that he first became aware of Miller Thomson and Mr. Geiger sometime in late April 2018.  
          Mr. Makowecki testified that he received an email from Mr. Ellis dated May 1, 2018.  This email forwarded an email from Frank Tiebert dated May 1, 2018 which, in turn, attached a letter from Miller Thomson dated April 30, 2018 purportedly signed by Mr. Geiger.  The Miller Thomson letter confirmed that $33,015,513.86 was being held in an interest-bearing trust account for the benefit of B&G Group Ltd and Makow Properties Ltd (Mr. Makowecki’s holding company).  
          The B&G Group referred to in the Miller Thomson letter is not a corporate entity.  Instead, it is a trade name that Mr. Ellis registered with the Alberta Corporate Registry on March 22, 2017.  After registering B&G as a trade name, Mr. Ellis opened a bank account in the name of B&G Group at RBC on or about March 28, 2017.  In the RBC account opening documentation, Mr. Ellis represented that B&G Group was a sole proprietorship and that he owned a 100% interest in the proprietorship.  
          It is admitted that the Miller Thomson letter is a forgery.  
          There is an inconsistency in Mr. Ellis’s evidence as to whether he received the May 1, 2018 Tiebert email or the April 30, 2018 forged Miller Thomson letter. Nevertheless Mr. Ellis was consistent in denying responsibility for the Miller Thomson letter.
          Mr. Ellis denied that he was the author of the Tiebert email dated May 1, 2018.
          Mr. Ellis denied that he was the author of the forged Miller Thomson letter dated April 30, 2018.
          Mr. Ellis denied that he was responsible for the signature of Mr. Geiger on the forged Miller Thomson letter.
                                                      v.            “RCMP Officer” Paul Desjardins
          Mr. Makowecki testified that after learning in mid September 2018 that the Miller Thomson letter was a forgery, he met with Mr. Ellis to apply some pressure and to discuss concerns with the Dynasty Project.  According to Mr. Makowecki, Mr. Ellis disclosed that his brother and a banker had been engaged in some type of fraudulent activity in relation to the Dynasty Project, the RCMP were investigating, and arrest warrants were being executed.  According to Mr. Makowecki, Mr. Ellis told him that a RCMP member by the name of Paul Desjardins would be contacting him in relation to the investigation.
          Over the next six weeks Mr. Makowecki had several text communications with a person holding himself out to be an investigator by the name of Paul Desjardins and that several meetings were scheduled, including meetings at a restaurant in Mexico where Mr. Makowecki was holidaying.  None of the meetings took place. 
          It is admitted that Paul Desjardins is not a member of the RCMP and that the RCMP were never investigating Mr. Ellis’ brother or a banker in relation to fraud allegations.
          Mr. Ellis testified that he had never seen the text messages between Mr. Makowecki and Paul Desjardins.
          Mr. Ellis testified that he did not write any of the text messages that purported to come from Paul Desjardins.
          Mr. Ellis testified that he is not associated with the telephone number used by Paul Desjardins to have text communications with Mr. Makowecki.
          Mr. Ellis testified that he has never held himself out to be Paul Desjardins.
b)     The Reebok Jersey Program
          It is admitted by the Crown and the Defence that beginning in the 2017-18 NHL season (which commenced in October 2017), the league switched from Reebok-branded team jerseys to Adidas-branded team jerseys. As a result, any remaining stocks of Reebok-branded NHL team jerseys would not be considered current.
          Mr. Ellis testified that the Reebok Jersey Program involved the purchase of some of the Reebok team jerseys, having the jerseys framed and then reselling the jerseys for a profit.
          Mr. Ellis testified that project began when he was in contact with a person named “Jack” through the “collecting world”.  He did not know “Jack’s last name, but Mr. Ellis had seen “Jack” at a few events.  Mr. Ellis did not explain the month or the year in which this contact took place.
      Mr. Ellis testified that “Jack” had some connections with Upper Deck, a sports memorabilia distributor in the United States.  Mr. Ellis described the development of the Reebok Jersey Project as follows:
... he [Jack] had given me a couple of Upper Deck jerseys that I took away.  And then that’s how that was formatted.  And that kind of exploded – it was sort of three different entities; jerseys from Canadian teams, game used jerseys, and then there was some potential of some equipment as well as jerseys.
      At some time following their first contact, “Jack” provided Mr. Ellis with a four-page schedule listing over 1,000 jerseys (both home and away jerseys of over 150 NHL players) that would be available for use in the Reebok Jersey Program.  The list also included other hockey equipment that would be available.
      Mr. Ellis testified that Mr. Wei Wong became involved in the Reebok Jersey Program.  Mr. Wong operated a business in Edmonton, Vestate Canada Inc (Vestate), which, among other things, framed sports jerseys and other sports memorabilia.  Mr. Ellis testified that Mr. Wong’s involvement in the Reebok Jersey Program was for the purpose of framing jerseys prior to their sale to the ultimate customer.  Mr. Ellis arranged for each of the investors in the Reebok Jersey Program to tour the Vestate manufacturing facility.  All agreed that the facility was impressive.
      Mr. Ellis testified that he had used Mr. Wong’s services in the past to very good success and that the quality of Mr. Wong’s work was better than anything that he had ever seen.  Mr. Ellis testified that he spoke to Mr. Wong regarding the Reebok Jersey Program.  As explained by Mr. Ellis:
We had discussed very briefly one time on his ability to handle a significant number of jerseys and it was a non-issue.  He said just bring them and let me do them.
      Mr. Ellis testified that from 2016 to 2018 or 2019, Mr. Wong framed between 80 and 100 jerseys for him.  Later he estimated that in total for all the projects, more than 100 and less than 150 jerseys were framed by Mr. Wong.
      In cross-examination the Crown suggested that the Jersey Project was a fiction.  Mr. Ellis emphatically disagreed.
      Also in cross-examination, the Crown suggested that Mr. Ellis had sold the very same interest in the jersey project three times to different investors or groups of investors.  Once again Mr. Ellis emphatically disagreed.
b)     The Bridge Financing Project
      The Bridge Financing Project began in late 2017.  Mr. Nikicevic invested two amounts in the project, $24,500 on November 1, 2017, and $15,750 on December 5, 2017.  Both amounts were deposited into Mr. Ellis’ B&G account at RBC.
      Mr. Ellis described his involvement with the project by saying “there were a group of guys” that he knew from the golf course. The plan was described by Mr. Ellis in the following way:
We – so there was a group of them and then Dusan [Mr. Nikicevic] invested into me because that’s what I was explained by one of the other guys is that he had people invest in him. I believe it was his brother-in-law.  And then they would give all the money to the guy buying the property.  And then his brother, I believe, was the real estate agent.  An then we would bridge the financing in between two buildings or three buildings.
      Mr. Ellis testified that the investment group in relation to the Bridge Financing Project “had nothing to do with hockey players”.  Specifically, Mr. Ellis testified that Kevin Lowe and Craig MacTavish were not involved.
      Mr. Ellis was not able to identify the persons in the group who were participating in the Bridge Financing Project.  In cross-examination he testified as follows:
Q.        Okay.  And in terms of bridge financing at some point the different investors’ funds need to come together at some point, right, for the actual financing to work.  So who ultimately was in control of the financing project in which Mr. Nikicevic was brought in?
A.        One of the other guys.
Q.        What’s his name?
A.        A bunch of guys I should have never gotten involved with.  His name was Brad.
Q.        Brad?
A.        I don’t know.
Q.        It wouldn’t be Brad Sevryn (phonetic) the accountant?
A.        No. No.
Q.        And how did you –
A.        Brent.  Brent, not Brad.  Brent.
Q.        And how did you pay Brent?
A.        Cash that’s how I got involved with these buys in the first place.
      Mr. Ellis testified that at some point after Mr. Nikicevic made his investments, he reported to Mr. Nikicevic that the project had been profitable and that Mr. Nikicevic’s share of the profit was $75,000.  However, Mr. Ellis also told Mr. Nikicevic that he had reinvested the funds.
      Mr. Ellis testified that Mr. Nikicevic has been repaid his investment in the Bridge Financing Project.  He explained that the repayment was made by giving Mr. Nikicevic access to a townhouse in Arizona for a few days during a soccer tournament.  Mr. Ellis also said that Mr. Nikicevic was paid by the delivery of some cash, although he did not specify the amount.  Finally, Mr. Ellis testified that on his arrest he was in possession of $21,455 that was seized by police and subject to civil forfeiture.  Mr. Ellis attributes this as a repayment to Mr. Nikicevic. 
      The Crown submits that the Bridge Financing Project was a sham that never existed.
      Mr. Ellis denies that this is the case.
d)     The Barcol Acquisition Project
      Mr. Ellis began his employment as the General Manager of Barcol in September 2017.  Several months later he was promoted to the Chief Operating Officer of Steelcraft.  In those positions he became familiar with the affairs of Barcol and Steelcraft.  In Mr. Ellis’ view, Barcol required some structural changes to make it more efficient. In particular, he observed that there was a problem with the whole relationship between Steelcraft as the parent company, and Barcol the subsidiary.  The identified problem was that Barcol could only sell Steelcraft products and was therefore “beholden to Steelcraft”.  For this reason, and given his background in acquisitions, Mr. Ellis felt that Barcol was an acquisition target.
      Mr. Ellis testified that he began discussions with the owner of Barcol and Steelcraft, Kim Mihalcheon.  He testified that he asked Ms. Mihalcheon whether she was interested in selling Barcol.  Her response was that “anything is for sale”.  Mr. Ellis further elaborated on Ms. Mihalcheon’s willingness to sell by testifying:
... I guess a bit of a joke in that world that when you ask someone if they are for sale, there are only two answers.  Number 1 is yes and the other one is absolutely not but if I was, how much do you think its worth? And that is where we were with Kim [Ms. Mihalcheon].
      Mr. Ellis emphasised that Ms. Mihalcheon did not have an emotional attachment to Barcol because it wasn’t in the family.  He explained that Ms. Mihalcheon’s father had originally been a small shareholder in Barcol and later acquired the interests of the other shareholders until he owned the entire company.
      Based on this Mr. Ellis testified that he initiated a process for a potential acquisition of Barcol.  He began by separately approaching Mr. Makowecki and then Mr. Deleeuw in or about mid to late 2018.  He explained to them that Ms. Mihalcheon was seriously ill with cancer and wanted to sell Barcol.  Both Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Deleeuw were interested in participating in the venture but ultimately neither went further with the investment opportunity.
      Mr. Ellis testified that he also approached Mr. Halliday regarding the purchase of Barcol.  As was the case with Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Deleeuw, Mr. Ellis explained that Ms. Mihalcheon was seriously ill and for this reason was a motivated seller.  Mr. Halliday’s interest in Barcol was greater than simply as an investor because, in or about September 2018, he resigned from his employment with ZCL Composites and was very interested in working with Mr. Ellis and becoming a senior member of the Barcol management team. 
      Mr. Ellis and Mr. Halliday entered into an agreement in writing dated January 24, 2019 by the terms of which Mr. Halliday purchased a 50% interest in “B&G Group Ltd” for a payment of $25,000 from Mr. Halliday to Mr. Ellis.  The agreement also provided that:
B&G Group Ltd. is in the process of acquiring 93.75% ownership of Barcol Door Ltd. and an additional stake in Steelcraft Door Ltd of 23.5%.  Ellis and Halliday will be partners in this venture.
      Mr. Halliday made a second investment in the Barcol acquisition project on March 8, 2019.  The amount of the investment was $24,475.  
      The Crown submits that the Barcol Acquisition project was not real but was simply a scheme to enrich Mr. Ellis at the expense of Mr. Halliday.
      Mr. Ellis denies any fraudulent activity in relation to the Barcol Acquisition.
e)      Other Investment Opportunities
      In 2018, Mr. Ellis sought and secured additional funds from Mr. Makowecki in relation to two other projects. The first was related to software development for Telus for which Mr. Makowecki paid Mr. Ellis $30,375. The second entailed limited merchandise related to Wayne Gretzky. Mr. Makowecki paid a total of $94,899 to participate in the Gretzky opportunity.
      The Crown submits that both projects were shams designed to enrich Mr. Ellis at Mr. Makowecki’s expense.
      Mr. Ellis denied any wrongdoing in relation to these projects.  
    V.            Assessment of Evidence of Mr. Ellis
      It is first necessary for me to assess Mr. Ellis’ credibility. I must determine whether I believe his evidence and thus whether he should be acquitted on that basis.
      The thrust of Mr. Ellis’ evidence is that all of the investment projects were legitimate business opportunities and that all the funds he received from the investors were passed on to those who were properly entitled to receive them.  He denies that he sold the same interest in the Dynasty Project or the Reebok Jersey Program to different sets of investors.  He denies any dishonesty or fraud in relation to the investment opportunities.
      I do not believe Mr. Ellis.
      I do not find Mr. Ellis to be a truthful or a credible witness.
      Mr. Ellis gave evidence that is demonstrably false on material issues.  His evidence was inconsistent with facts admitted in the Agreed Statement of Facts, is internally inconsistent and, in many respects, his evidence defied reason and common sense. 
      I will describe some of the examples of Mr. Ellis’ lack of credibility.
      Mr. Ellis testified that the Reebok Jersey program was sold to three groups of investors and that each of the three groups purchased a different “piece”.  That evidence is demonstrably false.  The falsehood is made clear by a comparison of two of the Joint Venture Agreements signed by the parties.  That comparison establishes that the Joint Venture Agreement signed by Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Deleeuw in November 2017 (later to include Mr. Halliday) and the Joint Venture Agreement signed by Mr. Lee and Mr. Hawman in April 2018 both contain identical language to describe the scope of the joint venture:
            Clause 2          The business name of the Venture will be Reebok Jersey Program
Clause 3          The exclusive purpose of the Venture will be the NHL Jersey and Equipment Purchase and Resale.
Clause 4          This venture will begin starting ... and continue in full force and effect (the “Term”) until the occurrence of the following event:
o   As agreed upon, all jerseys that are wanted have been purchased based upon first right of refusal.
Clause 7          The Members have appointed Nick Ellis to act as manager (the “Manager”) for the Venture
                        (emphasis added)
      The scope of these agreements is identical.  There is no room to suggest that these two groups of investors were purchasing different “pieces” of the Reebok Jersey Program.  Mr. Ellis lacks credibility when he suggests otherwise.
      Moreover, the Joint Venture Agreements of November 2017 and April 2018 were executed long after Mr. McLean had invested in the Reebok Jersey Program in September 2017.  Mr. Ellis did not testify that he imposed restrictions on the scope of the agreement with Mr. McLean.  After having sold the Reebok Jersey Program to Mr. McLean there was nothing left to sell to the two groups of joint venturers in November 2017 and April 2018.
      Mr. Ellis explained that Mr. McLean moved from the original Reebok Jersey Program to the Upper Deck “piece”.  This explanation potentially has some support because Mr. McLean’s name appeared as a party to the November 2017 Joint Venture Agreement but was seemingly removed from the agreement when Mr. Halliday purchased Mr. McLean’s interest in the Joint Venture Agreement in February 2018.  This is potentially consistent with Mr. Ellis’ evidence that Mr. McLean was moving to the Upper Deck “piece”.  However, Mr. Ellis’s evidence in this regard cannot be assessed in isolation but instead needs to be considered in the context of the other evidence, including the evidence of Mr. McLean that he never signed the Joint Venture Agreement, that his signature on the agreement is a forgery and that he was never in a joint venture with Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Deleeuw as described in the November 2017 Joint Venture Agreement.  When viewed in context, Mr. Ellis is not believable when he said that Mr. McLean’s September 2017 investment in the Reebok Jersey Program somehow transitioned into the Upper Deck “piece”.  In any event, as I will describe later, the Upper Deck “piece” was fictional.
      I conclude that Mr. Ellis was not being candid when he testified that each of the three groups of investors were sold different “pieces” of the Reebok Jersey Program.  
      Similarly, Mr. Ellis was not being candid when he repeatedly testified that each of the three Dynasty Project investors had purchased different “pieces” of that project.  When Mr. McLean first invested in the Dynasty Project in March 2016, a guarantee was given by Mr. Ellis in relation to Mr. McLean’s investment.  The guarantee disclosed that Mr. McLean was purchasing 40% of Mr. Ellis’ interest in the Dynasty Group.  The guarantee includes these additional handwritten words:
Terry will own 40% of all Holdings Involved Including Intellectual Property – Dynasty Group, Dynasty 79 Group and any Holdings owed by Nick Ellis.
      Mr. Ellis testified that these words were added to the guarantee to ensure that Mr. McLean would be “included in everything”.  Mr. Ellis testified:
It was actually Terry who said we should do something like this. He had been on a couple of opportunities where they had invested in some very specific technology and then other things branched out. And then he was told oh, the piece that you were in was only small.  Everything else made money.  So he wanted to ensure that he would be included in everything.
      Having agreed to provide a guarantee on terms that were intended to make it clear that Mr. McLean was “included in everything”, Mr. Ellis’s testimony that Mr. McLean had only purchased one of three “pieces” of the Dynasty Project is simply not believable.  
      Moreover, Mr. Ellis acknowledged in cross-examination that the evolution of the Dynasty Project into three pieces did not take place until at or around the time that Mr. Makowecki invested in the Dynasty Project.  That was more than six months after both Mr. Blackburn and Mr. McLean invested in the Dynasty Project in February 2016 and March 2016 respectively.  Thus, even if Mr. Ellis’s evidence on the evolution of the Dynasty Project is true, the transition into three “pieces” did not take place until after he had sold the same interest in project to both Mr. Blackburn and Mr. McLean.
      I do not believe Mr. Ellis when he testified that he sold separate “pieces” of the Dynasty Project to the three investors.
      Mr. Ellis was also inconsistent in his evidence on material points.  For example, in his direct evidence he testified that he was aware that a letter dated April 30, 2018 from the law firm of Miller Thomson had been given to Mr. Makowecki.  That letter certified that the law firm was holding more that $33 million in trust for the benefit of B&G and Makow Properties Ltd (Mr. Makowecki’s holding company).  By an Agreed Statement of Facts, it is admitted that the Miller Thomson letter was a forgery.  However, in cross-examination, Mr. Ellis denied knowing anything about the letter.  This was directly inconsistent with his examination-in-chief on a material point. Mr. Ellis lacks credibility when he asserts a lack of knowledge regarding the forged Miller Thomson letter.
      The involvement of Mike Bossy as an investor in the Dynasty Project was also a material issue on which Mr. Ellis was inconsistent. Mr. Ellis repeatedly testified that Mike Bossy was not involved in the Dynasty Project. This is confirmed in the Agreed Statement of Facts.  Despite these admissions, Mr. Ellis testified that he received an email from Frank Tiebert dated July 13, 2017 which he passed on to Mr. Makowecki. The Tiebert email specifically refers to Mr. Bossy as having a 10% interest in the project and that Mr. Ellis and Mr. Makowecki each had a 45% interest.  The inconsistency between the admitted facts and what Mr. Ellis led Mr. Makowecki to believe in 2017 regarding Mr. Bossy’s involvement undermines Mr. Ellis’ credibility.
      Mr. Ellis was cross-examined regarding the disposition of the funds he received from Mr. Nikicevic in relation to the Bridge Financing Project.  He testified that the funds were paid to Frank and Tom Tiebert.  However, there was no evidence that the Tieberts were involved in any of the investments other than the Dynasty Project and the Telus Project.  Moreover, Mr. Ellis also testified that Mr. Nikicevic’s investment in the Bridge Financing Project represented a purchase of a portion of Mr. Ellis’ interest in the project which, if true, would suggest that he was entitled to keep the proceeds of that sale and not pass them on to the Tieberts or anyone else.  Mr. Ellis’s evidence regarding this investment was circular and not credible.
      Mr. Ellis was cross-examined on the statement he provided to police following his arrest.  He testified that prior to police proceeding with the interview he had not been cautioned by police regarding his right to remain silent.  However, the recording from the interview clearly demonstrates that the proper caution was given.
      During the police interview Mr. Ellis was asked what had happened to the $1.8 million he had received by the investors.  Mr. Ellis responded by saying that he had never had the money.  The banking records and Mr. Ellis’ own evidence proves that this was false.  
      Mr. Ellis testified that a $120,000 payment was to be made to the Edmonton Oilers in connection with the Reebok Jersey Program. He explained that this was to be “our first big purchase through the Oilers”. Mr. Ellis showed Mr. McLean the cheque of B&G Group dated October 5, 2017 in the amount of $120,000 payable to “Edmonton Oilers Hockey Club”.  This led Mr. McLean to believe that $120,000 was being paid to the Oilers.  However, the cheque was never given to the Oilers and certainly was not negotiated. Mr. Ellis’s evidence in relation to a $120,000 payment to the Oilers is in direct conflict with the Agreed Statement of Facts which proves that the Oilers have never had any discussions with or been involved with Mr. Ellis or B&G in any investment or business including the bulk sales of team jerseys or equipment.  Mr. Ellis is lacking in credibility when he testified that $120,000 was to be paid to the Oilers for jerseys.  
      Mr. Ellis had a meeting with Mr. Makowecki on January 14, 2019.  During that meeting Mr. Ellis represented that Mr. Deleeuw was no longer part of the Reebok Jersey Program and that he had been paid $60,000 in relation to the investment.  If true, this would have meant that Mr. Deleeuw received a 50% profit on his investment.  Mr. Ellis’ representation was not true.  Mr. Deleeuw was paid $21,156 in May 2018.  This resulted in Mr. Deleeuw’s loss being reduced from $39,375 to $18,219.  
      Mr. Ellis is also lacking in credibility when he testified that after receiving the investment monies from the investors “... I gave it to the people that it needed to go to”.  The banking records are admitted by Mr. Ellis.  The records demonstrate that 100% of the $1.7 million invested by the Complainants were deposited into one of four accounts at RBC: a joint account with his wife (account ending ... 9249), a savings account (account ending ...0438), a second savings account (account ending ...7905) and a B&G account (account ending ... 0677).  The banking records show no evidence that funds were passed on to anyone who was intended to be the ultimate legitimate recipient.  To the contrary the banking records show that the funds received from investors were primarily used to paydown Mr. Ellis’ lines of credit, loan payments and personal credit card balances.  
      I conclude that I cannot believe the evidence of Mr. Ellis and, as a result, I cannot acquit at the first stage of W(D).
      Even though I do not believe the evidence of Mr. Ellis, I still need to consider whether his evidence denying guilt leaves me with a reasonable doubt.
      One of the grounds on which the Crown submits that fraud has been established is that none of the investment schemes were real and that they were all shams.  Mr. Ellis denied that this was the case.  He emphasized that the investment programs were legitimate.  In assessing whether this assertion creates a reasonable doubt, I need to consider the totality of his evidence.  
      When describing the investment programs, Mr. Ellis was not able to identify the actual name of any of the persons he was dealing with.  For example:
•         In relation to the Dynasty Project, Mr. Ellis testified that he met with “Dean” though a friend of a friend of his wife.  The meeting took place at a Starbuck’s restaurant.  He did not know “Dean’s” last name.
•         In relation to the Reebok Jersey Program, Mr. Ellis testified that he was in contact with a person named “Jack” who was a person he had met in the “collecting world”.  Mr. Ellis testified that did not know “Jack’s” last name, but that he had seen “Jack” at a few events.  
•         Also in relation to the Reebok Jersey Program, Mr. Ellis testified that he was contacted by “someone” with the Edmonton Oilers and made arrangements to purchase an inventory of jerseys in exchange for $15,000.  Mr. Ellis testified that he paid the amount in cash to “Richard” but that he did not receive a receipt for the money, nor did he receive all of the jerseys he was entitled to.  Mr. Ellis did not know “Richard’s” last name.
•         In relation to the Bridge Financing Project, Mr. Ellis testified that he became involved in the project with “a bunch of guys” from the golf course.  He thought the name of his contact was “Brad” but then later said it was “Brent”.  There was no indication that he knew “Brent’s” last name.
      Mr. Ellis did not have any obligation to testify.  Nor does he have any onus or obligation to prove that the investment programs were real or legitimate.  However, because he testified, his credibility must be assessed for the purpose of determining whether his evidence gives rise to reasonable doubt.  Reasonable doubt must be based on reason and common sense that is logically connected to the evidence, or the absence of evidence.  The evidence given by Mr. Ellis regarding the persons he had direct contact with in relation to these investments is grossly suspect.  There is no reason or common sense to his suggestion that he was involved in investment projects worth of millions of dollars without knowing the surnames of the persons he was dealing with.  This evidence has no ring of truth. It does not give rise to reasonable doubt.
      A substantial portion of the investment funds were payable to the Tieberts to satisfy the request for funds to pay expenses in relation to the Dynasty Project.  Yet the banking records do not disclose any payment to the Tieberts in any amount during the relevant period.  Mr. Ellis testified that he couldn’t be sure but he “wanted to say” that he paid the Tieberts from Scotiabank Account he had opened in or about January 2017.  However, 100% of the $1.2 million contributed by the Dynasty Project investors was deposited into Mr. Ellis’ accounts at RBC.  The RBC banking records do not show any transfers of any of the $1.2 million to the Scotiabank savings account.  Reasonable doubt does not arise in relation to Mr. Ellis’ evidence that he paid the Tieberts monies from the Scotiabank Account.
      Mr. Ellis testified that some of the payments to the Tieberts and others were made through unconventional means.  For example, he testified to making cash drops, transferring securities from an RBC investment account, paying inflated prices for merchandise at a coin and stamp business at West Edmonton Mall with the difference being passed on to the person to whom Mr. Ellis was to be paying.  These types of payments do not give rise to reasonable doubt because they defy reason and common sense.  This is simply not believable and does not give rise to reasonable doubt.  Moreover, RBC responded to the Production Order and disclosed a large number of bank accounts, loan accounts, lines of credit, Visa accounts and Mastercard accounts, but there is no reference to the existence of any RBC investment account associated with Mr. Ellis.
      Mr. Ellis made bare denials in relation to his involvement with false email accounts and a forged letter from a law firm.  These denials cannot be assessed in isolation and must be considered in the context of the whole of the evidence, which I will review later in these reasons.  After conducting that review, I conclude that the bare denials do not give rise to reasonable doubt.
      When determining whether reasonable doubt exists, I must also consider other potentially exculpatory evidence.  Mr. Makowecki testified that in late 2018 he was told by Mr. Ellis that a banker and Mr. Ellis’s brother were involved in a fraud that in some way related to the Dynasty Project investments.  Mr. Ellis told Mr. Makowecki that the RCMP were investigating and that arrest warrants were being executed.  According to Mr. Makowecki, Mr. Ellis also told him that that an RCMP investigator would be contacting him to further the investigation.  If it were true that a banker and Mr. Ellis’ brother were engaged in fraudulent activity in relation to the Dynasty Project, then this could potentially give rise to reasonable doubt because Mr. Ellis might himself have been the victim of fraudulent conduct in relation to the Dynasty Project.  However, the Agreed Statement of Facts directly contradicts Mr. Ellis’s statement to Mr. Makowecki.  The admitted facts prove that the RCMP were never investigating an alleged fraud involving Mr. Ellis’ brother or an employee of RBC. This evidence cannot give rise to reasonable doubt.
      When I consider the totality of Mr. Ellis’s evidence and other potentially exculpatory evidence, I am not left with reasonable doubt and therefore I would not acquit at the second stage of W(D) with respect to the counts on the Amended Indictment charging fraud over $5,000, use or trafficking in a forged document or personation.  However, as I will later describe, despite not believing Mr. Ellis, I have reasonable doubt with respect to counts 7, 15 and 24.
 VI.            Assessment of the Whole of the Evidence
      Even though I have concluded that I do not believe Mr. Ellis and that his evidence does not give rise to reasonable doubt, I cannot simply assume that the evidence tendered by the Crown is true.  I must therefore assess the totality of the evidence to determine whether the Crown has met its burden to prove the elements of each of the offences beyond a reasonable doubt.  
a)      Credibility Assessment of Crown Witnesses
      In undertaking this assessment, I need to firstly consider the credibility and reliability of each of the Crown witnesses.  
      Mr. Makowecki was interviewed by police in March 2019 regarding the allegations against Mr. Ellis.  Mr. Makowecki provided police with relevant documents in his possession.  Police asked whether he had any additional records that might be relevant, and he responded by saying that he had nothing further.  Mr. Makowecki’s statement was not true.  At the time of making that statement Mr. Makowecki had in his possession tape recordings of two discussions he had with Mr. Ellis during the relevant time.  After meeting with police, Mr. Makowecki recorded additional discussions that he had with Mr. Ellis.  Those recordings were not disclosed to police.
      On the morning that Mr. Makowecki was scheduled to testify, he approached the Crown and disclosed the existence of the recordings.  This resulted in an adjournment of the trial to permit the Defence to consider the new disclosure and to determine what position would taken in response.  When the trial resumed, Mr. Makowecki explained that he did not disclose the recordings to police because he was concerned that his actions may have been unlawful and that he did not want to make admissions to police.  He testified that the recordings were not made to trap Mr. Ellis but instead were made to simply have an accurate record of what was transpiring in the meetings with Mr. Ellis.  
      The Defence submits that Mr. Makowecki is lacking in credibility because of his untruthful statements to police.  This is a factor that must be considered in relation to Mr. Makowecki’s credibility. The fact that he was prepared to lie to police is a factor that causes me to view his evidence more cautiously.  However, much of Mr. Makowecki’s evidence is corroborated by emails, cheques and bank drafts.  As a result, while I view Mr. Makowecki’s evidence more cautiously than the other witnesses, I am satisfied that the evidence he gave is credible and reliable.
      Kim Mihalcheon is the owner of Barcol and Steelcraft.  She testified primarily regarding her dealings with Mr. Ellis and with respect to the Barcol and Steelcraft expense account policies.  There was nothing in Ms. Mihalcheon’s evidence that gave rise to any concerns regarding credibility.  I am satisfied that she was attempting to be completely truthful in her evidence.  However, there were some concerns regarding the probative value of her evidence in relation to expense claims.  Ms. Mihalcheon was responsible for the operations of the business not only in Edmonton but also elsewhere.  As a result, she travelled extensively and did not have daily direct contact with Mr. Ellis regarding the operation of Barcol.  Nor did she have any direct dealings with Mr. Ellis regarding expense claims.  Her evidence in relation to expense claims described her personal expectations as to the appropriateness of expense claims rather than the policies and practices that had been implemented at Barcol.  Her lack of involvement with the Barcol expense claims policies and procedures makes her evidence in relation to Mr. Ellis’ expense claims of little probative value. 
      The remaining Crown witnesses were honest and testified to the best of their ability regarding events that occurred several years ago.  Their credibility was not challenged by the Defence.  The reliability of their evidence was assisted by extensive emails that were exchanged at the time and by copies of cheques, bank drafts and other banking records to demonstrate the amount of the investments and the dates on which the investments were made.  The evidence of these witnesses was both credible and reliable.
b)     Mr. Ellis’ email Account
      Mr. Ellis acknowledged that nellis@***** is an email address that he has used for many years.  The records reflect numerous emails to and from this account, some of which are email exchanges with the Tieberts and with each of the investors in the investment projects that are the subject of this litigation. 
      Mr. Ellis acknowledged sending and receiving many emails through this email account.  However, Mr. Ellis denies that he is the author of several emails sent from this email address.  While he had no onus to prove that other persons had been using his email account, he testified that: 
•         his wife had frequent access to his cell phone;
•         when he was at work, he often left his cell phone on his desk while he attended meetings with other staff;
•         sometime in 2017 the internet service provider gave his email account to someone else and it took Mr. Ellis six days to get the account back.
      I do not believe Mr. Ellis when he testified that some of the emails from the nellis@***** email account had not been sent by him. The content of the many of the emails which Mr. Ellis disputes contain information and statements that resulted in additional investment in the projects. All the additional investment funds were deposited directly in Mr. Ellis’s RBC accounts and were used by him for his own purposes including the payment of lines of credit and credit card debt. 
      Apart from speculation, there is no basis to conclude that emails sent from the nellis@***** email account were created by anyone other than Mr. Ellis.  I find that all the emails sent from this email account were authored and sent by Mr. Ellis.
c)      The Dynasty Project
      The earliest and largest of the investment opportunities promoted by Mr. Ellis was known as the Dynasty Project.  I make the following findings of fact in relation to the Dynasty Project.
                                                        i.            The Investments by Blackburn, McLean and Makowecki
      I find that Mr. Ellis separately represented to each of Mr. Blackburn, Mr.  McLean and Mr. Makowecki that he and several present or former NHL players, including Mike Bossy, had hired a computer programmer, or coder, to create technology that would provide “live” based software and applications pertaining to professional sports.  This technology was initially created for use in NHL games and was intended to provide, in real time, a way to enhance the experience of hockey fans.  
      Each of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki invested in the Dynasty Project, but none were aware that the others were participating.  Between February 2016 and August 2018, they collectively paid Mr. Ellis almost $1.2 million specifically with respect to the project. The amounts invested can be summarized as follows:
Mr. Blackburn                         $193,795
Mr. McLean                            $399,102
Mr. Makowecki                      $596,409
      Mr. Blackburn made his first investment of $18,000 in the Dynasty Project on February 6, 2016.  Over the next 17 months ending July 2017, Mr. Blackburn made 31 additional investments in the Dynasty Project.  The size of those additional investments ranged from a high of $28,127 to a low of $394.  Mr. Blackburn made a final investment of $2,310 one year later in August 2018.  
      Mr. McLean made his first investment of $48,000 in the Dynasty Project on March 10, 2016.  Over the next 17 months ending in August 2018, Mr. Blackburn made 29 additional investments in the Dynasty Project.  The size of those additional investments ranged from a high of $28,800 to a low of $5,500.  Mr. McLean made one final investment almost a year later in August 2018 in the amount of $8,840.
      Mr. Makowecki made his first investment of $76,813 in the Dynasty Project by way of a loan in September 2016.  This was later converted to equity.  During the period of October 2016 to June 2018, he made 19 additional investments in the Dynasty Project.  The size of those additional investments ranged from a high of $48,333 to a low of $5,078.
                                                      ii.            The Tieberts are Fictional Characters
      The investments by Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki in the Dynasty Project shared significant common features. One of those features was that two purported Ontario lawyers, Frank Tiebert and Tom Tiebert, claimed to represent each of the investors by, among other things, negotiating for the sale of the technology to Microsoft and making other arrangements to attempt to facilitate the closing of the transactions.  While the lawyers purported to represent Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki, there was virtually no direct contact between them and the lawyers.  Instead, almost all communications flowed through Mr. Ellis.  
      The one notable exception is that Mr. McLean had a short meeting with Mr. Ellis and with someone holding himself out to be Tom Tiebert at a Starbucks in Edmonton. The meeting was scheduled at a time when it was represented that Mr. Tiebert was passing through Edmonton. It took place at a coffee shop.  Mr. Tiebert did not give Mr. McLean his business card or otherwise identify himself.  The discussions were general in nature and no specifics were discussed.  When viewing that meeting in isolation, it might seem reasonable to conclude that the person Mr. McLean met was Mr. Tiebert.  However, when I consider the totality of the evidence, as I will describe later in these reasons, I cannot find that the person Mr. McLean met was actually Tom Tiebert.  
      None of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean or Mr. Makowecki had any real information regarding the Tieberts.  For example, they did not know which law firm the lawyers were associated with.  The investors were never provided with an address for the Tieberts’ law firm.  Even when Mr. McLean travelled to Toronto to attend a scheduled meeting with the Tieberts, he did not have their address but, instead, was to be picked up by a driver at his hotel to attend the meeting.  Despite his travel to Toronto specifically for this meeting, it did not take place and Mr. McLean returned home without ever seeing or meeting the Tieberts. 
      None of the investors had a telephone number with which to contact the Tieberts.  
      What is also common to each of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki is that a significant number of additional investment contributions were required because the Tieberts sought additional funds for various purposes. The requests from the Tieberts came by emails that were sent to Mr. Ellis and then forwarded on to the investors. In the case of Mr. Blackburn, the additional funds were requested by the Tieberts for the purpose of purchasing the interests of other Dynasty Project investors including Mike Bossy and other professional hockey players.  It was represented to Mr. Blackburn that these hockey players had to dispose of their investment in the Dynasty Project because of a potential conflict of interest with the NHL.  In addition, Mr. Blackburn’s cash contributions were required to reimburse the Tieberts for fees and costs, Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) expenses, accounting expenses and other expenses “to meet GAAP” (generally accepted accounting principles).  In the case of Mr. McLean, the additional funds were generally for injections into Tiebert’s operating account to fund travel expenses, as well as for other expenses such as “off-set” amounts recommended by an accounting firm, PricewaterhouseCoopers (PWC).  In the case of Mr. Makowecki, the additional funds were primarily for purchasing the interests of other investors in the project so that he and Mr. Ellis would each have a 50/50 interest in the project. 
      What is also common to each of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki is that during the time that they were being asked to pay additional funds, the Tieberts were making representations regarding the significantly escalating values of the investments.  For example: 
•         In the case of Mr. Blackburn, by late July 2016, the Tieberts represented that the agreed sale price for the technology was $9.1 million, which amount was in their trust account waiting for disbursement. 
•         In the case of Mr. Makowecki, the value of the investment was represented by the Tieberts to be as high as $33 million.  In May 2018 this amount was represented to be held in the trust account of Miller Thomson in Edmonton for the benefit of B&G (Mr. Ellis) and Makow Properties (Mr. Makowecki’s holding company).  
•         In the case of Mr. McLean, the Tieberts represented in an email dated August 10, 2017 that “the guarantee to the Dynasty Group (McLean 50%; Ellis 50%) would be $32.75Billion USD”.  
      I find that the promise of millions (or billions) of dollars of returns within a very short time frame enticed each of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki to make the ongoing contributions and provided them with confidence that the projects had legitimacy, when quite the opposite was true.
      What is also common to each of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki is that none of them made any payments directly to the Tieberts.  Instead, when the Tieberts sought additional funds, the investors always paid their share of the funds directly to Mr. Ellis for forwarding to the Tieberts. While there are numerous examples of this, I will refer to just a few:
•         On September 13, 2016 at 4:26 pm, Tom Tiebert sent an email to Mr. Blackburn and Mr. Ellis reporting on the current status of the project including the involvement of Bill Gates and Microsoft.  With the report Mr. Tiebert also asked for additional funds because the “operating account” was short.  The email said in part:
… With the CRA, MS [Microsoft] and Mr. Gates and his foundation involved, it has been a bit daunting at times.  I will have all of the details and timing of transfers etc. by tomorrow afternoon, but we are targeting Tuesday September 20th at the very outside.  I can tell you without doubt this is the last call for funding.  The operating account is short by $6,215.75.  Please follow the protocol as usual.  
The protocol that is referred to in the email involved Mr. Blackburn paying Mr. Ellis 50% of the amount requested and then Mr. Ellis combining this amount with his 50% and passing the full amount requested on to the Tieberts.
In an email dated September 13, 2016 at 7:17 pm, Mr. Ellis reported to Tom Tiebert and Mr. Blackburn that 
I completed the transfer as asked  
(emphasis added)
On September 15, 2016, Mr. Blackburn paid $3,107.88 (his 50% of the total $6,215.75) to Mr. Ellis and thanked Mr. Ellis for “… forwarding this amount on our behalf”.
While the banking records show $3,107.88 (50% of the amount requested by Tom Tiebert) being paid by Mr. Blackburn into Mr. Ellis’ personal RBC joint bank account, there is no corresponding entry in the banking records showing the “transfer” of $6,215.75 to Tom Tiebert as had been represented in Mr. Ellis’ email.  I conclude that this amount was never transferred by Mr. Ellis to the Tieberts.  I find that Mr. Ellis’ email reporting that he had “completed the transfer” was false and was a deception designed to make Mr. Blackburn believe that the funds had been transferred when, in fact, they had not been. 
•         On August 10, 2016 at 9:26 am, Tom Tiebert sent an email to Mr. Ellis and Mr. Blackburn reporting that the target date of the release of the “sale” funds was August 17, 2016.  In the same email, Mr. Tiebert asked that additional funds be provided.  His email explained:
Given the fact that GAAP is very specific we need $9,250 into the operating account which currently carries a balance of approx. $1,200.
Mr. Tiebert did not explain what specific feature of GAAP required the deposit of funds. Despite the lack of any real explanation, Mr. Blackburn deposited his 50% share, $4,625, into Mr. Ellis’ personal joint RBC account on the same day, August 10, 2016.  
Also on August 10, 2016 at 10:11 am, Mr. Tiebert sent a second email to Mr. Ellis and Mr. Blackburn which said:
Nick, 
Funds received.
Thanks
Tom.
(emphasis added)
While the banking records show Mr. Blackburn’s funds being deposited into Mr. Ellis’ bank account on August 10, 2016, the bank records do not disclose any payment to Mr. Tiebert in the amount of $9,250 at or around that time, or at any time.  I find that Mr. Ellis did not pass Mr. Blackburn’s funds on to the Tieberts.  Nor did Mr. Ellis pass on to the Tieberts his own share of the expense.  I find that the email from Tom Tiebert which confirmed “Funds received” was false and was a deception designed to make Mr. Blackburn believe that his funds and an identical contribution from Mr. Ellis had been sent to the Tieberts. 
•         In November 2016 Tom Tiebert asked for a further $7,825 for “filings”.  By email dated November 3, 2016, Mr. Tiebert provided a “Positive update” on the negotiations with the CRA and also confirmed receipt of the $7,825 as follows:  
FYI funds transfer received for the filings – confirmation of $7,825
(emphasis added)
Mr. Blackburn submitted his $3,912.50 to Mr. Ellis.  The banking records confirm this deposit into Mr. Ellis’ personal joint RBC account on November 14, 2016.  The banking records do not show any transfer to Tom Tiebert or anyone else at or around that time, despite confirmation that $7,825 had been received.  I find that Mr. Ellis did not transfer $7,825 to the Tieberts.  I find that the Tiebert email that confirmed “funds received” was false and was a deception designed to make Mr. Blackburn believe that the full amount requested by the Tieberts had been transferred.  
•         On September 22, 2016, Frank Tiebert sent an email to Mr. Ellis, Mr. McLean and Tom Tiebert.  This email reported on a verbal agreement with Microsoft in principle which would result in a payment to Mr. Ellis and Mr. McLean in the total amount of US$85 million on closing plus annual royalties with a guaranteed minimum of US$18 million in Years 1 and 2.  Consistent with the pattern, Mr. Tiebert also requested a payment in the amount of $15,000 to cover additional expenses.  
Mr. McLean promptly paid his share, $7,500, to Mr. Ellis who deposited the funds into his personal joint RBC account on September 23, 2016.
On September 22, 2016, Mr. Ellis sent an email to Frank Tiebert, Mr. McLean and Tom Tiebert which said:
Hi
I just completed the transfer for $15K.
Nick
(emphasis added)
While the banking records disclose Mr. McLean’s $7,500 being deposited into Mr. Ellis’s personal RBC bank account, the banking records do not disclose any transfer of funds to the Tieberts as represented in Mr. Ellis’s email of September 22, 2016.  I find that Mr. Ellis did not transfer $15,000 to the Tieberts.  I find that Mr. Ellis’ email that represented that he had “just completed the transfer for $15K” was false and was a deception designed to make Mr. McLean believe that his contribution and an equal amount from Mr. Ellis had been paid to the Tieberts. 
•         On December 28, 2016, Frank Tiebert wrote to Mr. Ellis and Mr. McLean confirming that Microsoft was “committing $2.4B based on our delivery of the NBA and NCAA”.  The email represented that Microsoft had moved the completion date to January 12, 2017.  The email also made a further request for funds:
There is one last ask and we can assure you this is the last time we will need this completed.  A cash injection of $18,000 is necessary so we are not in any conflict – this is mostly driven by the NCAA.
There was no explanation as to what the conflict was or how the conflict would be removed with the payment of $18,000.  Despite this, Mr. McLean paid Mr. Ellis $9,000 which was deposited into Mr. Ellis’ personal joint RBC account on December 28, 2016.  Mr. Ellis then sent an email to Mr. Tiebert and Mr. McLean later on December 28, 2016 which said: 
The transfer for $18K has been completed.
(emphasis added)
However, the banking records do not show any transfer of $18,000 to Mr. Tiebert or to anyone else on or near December 28, 2016.  I find that Mr. Ellis did not transfer $18,000 to the Tieberts as represented in his email.  This representation was false and was a deception designed to make Mr. McLean believe that his contribution and an equal amount from Mr. Ellis had been paid to the Tieberts. 
•         On February 2, 2017 Frank Tiebert sent an email to Mr. McLean and Mr. Ellis with an update on the status of the transaction.  Among other things, the email reported that there was a meeting with “MS (Mr. Gates)” scheduled for February 9, 2017 in Edmonton.  The final signing was to take place on February 16, 2017 in Seattle.  The funds would be transferred into trust on February 17, 2016 and the funds would be released on February 21, 2017.  Consistent with the pattern, the email also asked for additional funds:
Unfortunately we will be covering expenses directly related to our firm as well as expenses related to the union Executive and all expenses abroad.  We forecast $22,000.  …
Nick: Please complete ASAP per previous protocol
Mr. McLean immediately paid his 50% share of this amount which is shown as being deposited in Mr. Ellis’ personal day-to-day RBC bank account on February 2, 2017.  
Mr. Ellis sent an email on February 2, 2017 and said:  
Thanks Frank.  Transfer is complete …
(emphasis added)
However, the banking records do not show a transfer of $22,000 from any of Mr. Ellis’ bank accounts to Mr. Teibert or anyone else on or near February 2, 2017.  I find that Mr. Ellis did not transfer $22,000 to the Tieberts as represented in his email.  This representation was false and was a deception designed to make Mr. McLean believe that his contribution and an equal amount from Mr. Ellis had been paid to the Tieberts. 
•         On April 18, 2018, Frank Tiebert sent an email to Mr. Ellis reporting that the Dynasty deal was approaching $33 million and that $24,736,260 was currently in trust.  Mr. Tiebert explained that an audit had been completed by PWC that identified $41,455 payable to the software developer.  Also on April 18, 2018 Mr. Ellis forwarded this email to Mr. Makowecki.  Mr. Ellis represented to Mr. Makowecki that “I will make arrangements to get him the final piece asap”.  On this basis Mr. Makowecki gave Mr. Ellis a cheque dated April 19, 2018 in the amount of $20,727.50 for his 50% share of the expense.  
The RBC banking records show that Mr. Makowecki’s funds were deposited in Mr. Ellis’ RBC day-to-day banking account on April 20, 2020.  However, the banking records do not show a transfer from any of Mr. Ellis’ bank accounts in the amount of $41,455 to the Tieberts in relation to this expense. I find that Mr. Ellis did not transfer $41,455 to the Tieberts as Mr. Ellis represented.  Mr. Ellis’ representation was false and was a deception designed to make Mr. McLean believe that his contribution and an equal amount from Mr. Ellis would be paid to the Tieberts. 
      The Crown submits that Frank Tiebert and Tom Teibert are not lawyers.
      The Agreed Statement of Facts proves that Frank Tiebert and Tom Tiebert are not members of the Law Society of Alberta.  A statutory declaration from the Manager of the Membership Services Department of the Law Society of Ontario proves that there is not now, and there has never been, a member of the Law Society of Ontario with the last name Tiebert. 
      There are also many unusual features of the evidence that strongly suggest that the Tieberts were not lawyers.  For example, many of the requests for funds were for the purpose of covering expenses that the Tieberts were incurring. Even assuming expenses were being incurred by the Tieberts on behalf of their clients, it would be expected that at some point during the two years that Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki were involved as clients, some billing statements would have been provided to the clients to account for the substantial amounts that were paid in relation to the Tieberts’ expenses.  None were received and no accounting was provided. This is unusual and further calls into question whether the Tieberts were lawyers.
      The exchange of emails makes it clear that the Tieberts had contact information for all of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki.  Yet despite purporting to be representing these clients on multi-million-dollar transactions, they had no communication of any kind with Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean or Mr. Makowecki after police were contacted in March 2019.  
      The totality of these facts leads me to infer that the Tieberts were not lawyers. 
      The email address for Tom Tiebert is also concerning.  The email communications with the Tieberts were primarily through an email address, Tom.Tiebert@*****.  The Agreed Statement of Facts proves that this email address was set up on May 23, 2016, just a few months after Mr. Blackburn and Mr. MacLean made their first investment in the Dynasty Project.  The person who set up the email account through Yahoo! provided a “recovery phone” number of 1 (604) 562 ****.  Mr. Ellis has acknowledged that this is the phone number that he has used for years.  
      The Agreed Statement of Facts also provides that:
Yahoo! Records confirm that the above “recovery phone” number was “verified”.  This means that during the account creation process, an SMS text message was sent to that phone number.  The text message contained a unique code, which the phone user then entered in the Yahoo Mail account creation screen to connect the account to that telephone number.
      Based on the Agreed Statement of Facts, I find that this email address was activated only after Yahoo! sent a text message to Mr. Ellis’ phone and only after the user of Mr. Ellis’ phone entered the unique code that had been provided by Yahoo!.
      The Crown submits that after considering the totality of the evidence relating to the Tieberts and the Tiebert email account, I should infer that the Tieberts were not real people but instead fictional characters.  The Crown submits that I should infer that Mr. Ellis was responsible for setting up and operating the Tiebert email account to create the false impression that the Tieberts were legitimate lawyers who were acting on behalf of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki, all for the purpose of lending legitimacy to the project and to entice additional investment from these investors.  I conclude that these are clearly inferences that can be drawn from the facts, but before making these inferences I need to consider any other reasonable inferences that would be consistent with reasonable doubt as to Mr. Ellis’ guilt.
      One alternate inference is that some other person who is not connected with Mr. Ellis created the Tiebert email account and used it to send messages to Mr. Ellis regarding the Dynasty Project. However, this alternate theory is so remote as to amount to speculation.  What is clear is that the Tiebert email account was instrumental in enticing Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki to make substantial additional investments in the Dynasty Project and that 100% of the funds went into Mr. Ellis’ RBC bank accounts.  I conclude that this virtually eliminates the possibility that some person unconnected to Mr. Ellis created and operated the Tiebert email account.  This potential alternate inference is not reasonable, and the Crown has no obligation to rebut it.  
      Another alternate inference is that some unknown person or persons worked in conjunction with Mr. Ellis to create and use the Tiebert email account for the purpose of seeking additional investment contributions from Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki.  This alternate theory does not give rise to reasonable doubt because under this theory Mr. Ellis would still be a party to the offence.  However, this theory is plausible because of the evidence of the short meeting between Mr. Ellis, Mr. McLean and a person holding himself out to be Tom Tiebert at a Starbucks in Edmonton.  Thus, it is possible that Mr. Ellis was working with some unknown person.
      I infer that Mr. Ellis was responsible for setting up the email account Tom.Tiebert@***** and that he (or some other person who was acting in conjunction with Mr. Ellis) was the author of the emails from this email account.  I also infer that the Tieberts did not exist and were simply fictitious people that were used by Mr. Ellis as a prop to entice Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki to make additional investments into the Dynasty Project.
      In drawing these inferences, I consider the content of the email exchanges between the Tieberts and Mr. Ellis and also the fact that these communications were passed on to the investors.  As the Court of Appeal recently observed in R v Kebede, 2022 ABCA 353 at para 61:   
… In Evans [R v Evans, 1993 CanLII 86 (SCC), [1993] 3 SCR 653] at 662-663, the court referred with approval to R v Ferber (1987), 1987 ABCA 86 (CanLII), 36 CCC (3d) 157, 2 WCB (2d) 102 (Ont CA), where a third party received a phone call from someone believed to be the eventual murder victim, but whom he could not identify. The content of what that person said, however, was treated as circumstantial evidence of her identity. Plainly, the trier of fact could connect the dots. 
(emphasis added)
      I conclude that the content of the email exchanges clearly demonstrate that the same person or persons were involved in both sending and receiving messages between Mr. Ellis’ email account and the Tiebert email account.  In some instances, the Tieberts confirmed receipt of funds that they had requested, but the banking records demonstrate that the funds were never sent.  In other instances, Mr. Ellis confirmed that the amounts had been transferred when the banking records demonstrate that they had not been sent. There is no evidence that the Tieberts followed up to again ask for the funds.  I conclude that there was no need to send a reminder because it was known that the transfers were never real.
      The evidence leads to only one conclusion.  Mr. Ellis, either alone or acting with some other unknown person or persons, was responsible for the operation of the Tiebert email account, which he set up using his own phone number as the recovery phone.  Mr. Ellis misrepresented himself as the fictional Tieberts to make reports about significantly escalating Dynasty Project investment values while at the same time asking for additional contributions.  
      The evidence in relation to the counts of fraud over $5,000 in relation to Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki is circumstantial.  However, the evidence is overwhelming and is not consistent with any other inference that is more than speculative. The evidence does not give rise to any reasonable doubt.
      The Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Ellis’ conduct was dishonest and amounted to a deception perpetrated by Mr. Ellis to extract additional monies from each of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki.  The evidence also proves beyond a reasonable doubt that each of these investors have been deprived of large amounts of money because of Mr. Ellis’ deception and dishonesty.
                                                    iii.            Mike Bossy Not Involved in Dynasty Project
      The dishonesty and deception of Mr. Ellis goes beyond the use of the fictional Tiebert characters and the use of the Tiebert email account.
      Mr. Ellis’ representation that Mike Bossy and other NHL players were involved in the Dynasty Project was false.  I conclude that Mr. Ellis made this representation to entice Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki to invest in the project. The Agreed Statement of Facts, and Mr. Ellis’ admissions at trial make it clear that Mr. Bossy was not involved.  
      Despite Mr. Bossy not being involved in the Dynasty Project, each of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki received communications from an email address, bossym573@*****.  The person sending the email messages represented that he or she was Mike Bossy and provided input regarding the Dynasty Project.  Receipt of these emails generally coincided with a request for funds from Tom Tiebert and Frank Tiebert, persons who Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki thought to be lawyers acting on their behalf in relation to the Dynasty Project.  For example:
•         on January 25, 2017, when the Tieberts were seeking a further $11,000 from Mr. McLean, an email purportedly from Mike Bossy was forwarded to Mr. McLean.  The Bossy email provided encouragement by saying “... I just talked to the boys and it sounds like your going to have a good week.  Give me a shout when its done.  You and your partner should be pretty excited.  Good job.”  
•         on July 13, 2017, at a time when Mr. McLean was being asked to pay a further $15,000, an email purportedly from Mike Bossy was sent to Mr. McLean and Mr. Ellis.  The email said in part: “... This is a big deal and obviously confidential. I just wanted to add my 2 cents and make sure you are both good.  Frank and Tom are on top of everything and have a handle on Bill Gates too.  Don’t mistake Toms bumbling as being dumb, he is very well respected and a genius in the boardroom.”
•         on July 18, 2017, at a time when Mr. Makowecki was being asked by the Tieberts for an additional contribution of $19,107, a person purporting to be Mr. Bossy sent Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Ellis an email in which the author said “... I don’t like the date push but we have to like Franks effort and the found royalty part.  I will send my transfer right away and confirm.”  The transfer refers to a sale of Mr. Bossy’s 10% interest in the project – an interest he never had.
      The bossym573@***** email address was also used to calm Mr. Makowecki after he learned that a letter from the law firm of Miller Thomson confirming that $33 million was being held in trust was a forgery.  An email purportedly from Mike Bossy dated October 31, 2018 said:
Hi Boris Mike B here, I’m not supposed to be saying anything but I know you guys are stressed and Nick sure is.  I have been contacted a few times about this crazy ride and I just wanted to let you know you guys are safe and secure.  Nick really handled things good.  the police got involved at the right time and I owe you both a apology because of the two idiots in the deal.  I will see you in Feb at the game in Edmonton and I hope to see Blake there to.
(emphasis added)
      The bossym573@***** email address was also used to send a message to Mr. Blackburn on August 10, 2016.  This was at a time when Mr. Blackburn believed that he and Mr. Ellis were 50/50 partners in the Dynasty Project after having purchased the interest of Mike Bossy.  It was also at a time when Mr. Blackburn was being asked to make regular additional investments including:
August 5, 2016                        $7,201
August 10, 2016                      $4,625
August 12, 2016                      $5,250
August 15, 2016                      $8,751
August 17, 2016                      $5,807
August 19, 2016                      $1,153
August 22, 2016                      $9,976
August 24, 2016                      $8,720
August 25, 2016                      $6,750
August 26, 2016                      $4,337
      The August 10, 2016 Bossy email to Mr. Blackburn did not specifically speak of the Dynasty Project, but it did refer to “our good friend Nick Ellis” and offered to meet with Mr. Blackburn’s son at a “signing event” in Ontario.  
      The Agreed Statement of Facts proves that Mr. Bossy did not know of and has never used the bossym573@***** email address.  Therefore, someone other than Mr. Bossy surreptitiously set up this account.
      The Crown submits that Mr. Ellis was responsible for creating the Mike Bossy email account.  The Crown submits that the email communications from the Mike Bossy email account were authored by Mr. Ellis and were designed to provide comfort to each of the investors regarding the legitimacy of the Dynasty Project and, in this way, encourage additional contributions from the investors or to explain delays in the closing of the project.  These are reasonable inferences based on the proven facts.  However, before coming to any conclusion in relation to these inferences, I need to consider whether there are alternate inferences that are consistent with reasonable doubt as to guilt.
      One alternate inference is that some other person, completely unrelated to Mr. Ellis created and operated the bossym573@***** email address. Unlike the Tom Tiebert email account, the person who set up the Mike Bossy email account did not provide a recovery telephone number.  In addition, the IP address recorded by Google when the account was created belonged to an Xplornet customer, but their records are not available to determine who that customer was.  As a result, there is no direct link between the Mike Bossy email address and Mr. Ellis. This amounts to an absence of evidence that can be used as part of the assessment as to whether there is reasonable doubt regarding whether Mr. Ellis was responsible for creating the email address and using the address by posing as Mr. Bossy.  However, this assessment cannot be undertaken in a narrow fashion by simply relying on the absence of evidence of a direct tie between Mr. Ellis and the email account.  Instead, it is necessary to look at the whole of the evidence in relation to the email account.
      The Agreed Statement of Facts proves that the email address, bossym573@***** was set up through Google LLC on July 26, 2016, after the first Dynasty investments had been made by Mr. Blackburn and Mr. McLean but shortly before the first Dynasty investment of Mr. Makowecki.  The August 10, 2016 Bossy email to Mr. Blackburn came only ten days after the bossym573@***** email account was created and at a time when Mr. Blackburn was making substantial payments to Mr. Ellis in relation to the Dynasty Project (in August 2016 a total of ten contributions were made totalling $62,570).  I am satisfied that this email provided comfort to Mr. Blackburn regarding the legitimacy of the project because of Mr. Ellis’s close relationship with Mr. Bossy, who Mr. Blackburn thought to be one of the original investors.
      The email account was last accessed on November 13, 2018 very shortly after the last investments were made in the Dynasty project.  This was also at a time shortly after Mr. Makowecki learned that the Miller Thomson $33 million confirmation letter was a forgery.  It was also at a time when, after being pressed by Mr. Makowecki regarding the Dynasty project, Mr. Ellis reported allegations of fraud against his brother and a bank employee, which based upon the Agreed Statement of Facts were false.  In short, the last use of the Mike Bossy email account coincided with the recognition that the legitimacy of the Dynasty Project was highly questionable.
      The fake Mike Bossy emails were part of a deception that resulted in significant additional investments in the Dynasty Project.  Mr. Ellis was the only person who benefited from the additional investments.  All the funds went into his personal RBC accounts. None of the funds were paid to other persons who might be legitimately connected to the Dynasty Project.  To the contrary, all the funds were used by Mr. Ellis to pay his personal debt obligations on his line of credit, credit card or car loan.  No persons benefited from the Dynasty investments other than Mr. Ellis.  
      When I consider the totality of the evidence, I conclude that the alternate inference involving some unknown and unrelated person creating and operating the Mike Bossy email account is not a reasonable inference and that the Crown has no obligation to rebut this speculative inference.
      Another alternate inference is that some unknown person or persons worked in conjunction with Mr. Ellis to create and use the Bossy email account for the purpose of seeking additional investment contributions from Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki.  This alternate theory does not give rise to reasonable doubt because under this theory Mr. Ellis would still be a party to the offence.  
      When I consider the totality of the evidence, I infer that the Mike Bossy email account was created by Mr. Ellis and that he, alone or in conjunction with an unknown person or persons, used the account to communicate with Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki while pretending to be Mr. Bossy.  I make this inference based on the admitted facts as well as the content and timing of the emails sent from the Mike Bossy email account.  
      I therefore conclude that the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Ellis used the Bossy email account in a deceptive fashion with the intention of enticing the investors to provide additional funds in relation to the Dynasty Project, all of which went into the personal RBC bank account of Mr. Ellis.  Even if Mr. Ellis did not act alone in sending the emails, he certainly shared a common intention with the author of the emails to craft deceptive messages for Mr. Ellis’ own benefit and in that way was a party to the personation of Mike Bossy and the trafficking of forged emails from the Mike Bossy account. 
      I find Mr. Ellis guilty on Count 18, personation of Mike Bossy.
      I find Mr. Ellis guilty on Count 19, use, trafficking or possession of the forged emails sent from the Mike Bossy email account.  
                                                    iv.            Miller Thomson – Bruce Geiger
      By late April 2018, Mr. Makowecki had been pressing Mr. Ellis for information regarding the Dynasty Project and the closing of the transaction.  I find that Mr. Ellis forwarded to Mr. Makowecki an email from Frank Tiebert which in turn attached a letter dated April 30, 2018 purportedly from Miller Thomson and purportedly signed by “Bruce N. Geiger, Partner – Edmonton”.  
      Miller Thomson is a well know national law firm with offices in Edmonton and elsewhere in Canada.  The Miller Thomson letter represented that funds in the amount of $33,015,513.86 were being held in an interest-bearing trust account under the Dynasty Group name and for the benefit of B&G Group Ltd and Makow Properties Ltd (Mr. Makowecki’s holding company). 
      The Agreed Statement of Facts proves that the Miller Thomson letter was a forgery.  Neither Mr. Geiger nor Miller Thomson were involved with the Dynasty Project.  The Crown submits that Mr. Ellis used or trafficked in the forged Miller Thomson letter and that he provided the forged letter to Mr. Makowecki to create the impression of legitimacy in relation to the Dynasty Project and to justify further delays in the closing of the transaction.
      Mr. Ellis lacks credibility when he suggests that he had no knowledge of the email that attached the forged Miller Thomson letter.
      For the reasons I have earlier given, I conclude that the Tieberts did not exist but were fictional persons used as props by Mr. Ellis.  I have found that Mr. Ellis was responsible for creating and using the Tiebert email account.  I conclude that Mr. Ellis, either alone or working in conjunction with others, used the Tiebert email account to send the forged Miller Thomson letter to Mr. Makowecki.  The forged Miller Thomson letter was used by Mr. Ellis to calm Mr. Makowecki and to entice further investment contributions from him.   I conclude that Mr. Ellis knew that the Miller Thomson letter was a forgery.  
      An alternate inference that some unknown person or persons unrelated or unconnected to Mr. Ellis forged the Miller Thomson letter and used or trafficked in the forgery by sending it to Mr. Makowecki amounts to nothing other than pure speculation.  This theory does not need to be rebutted by the Crown.  A second alternate theory that Mr. Ellis worked in conjunction with an unknown person or persons in relation to the use or trafficking of the forged Miller Thomson letter does not give rise to reasonable doubt because Mr. Ellis would still be a party to the offence.
      I find that the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Ellis used, trafficked, or possessed the forged Miller Thomson letter dated April 30, 2018.  I also find that Mr. Ellis, either alone or acting in conjunction with other unknown persons created the Miller Thomson letter and, in this way, personated Mr. Geiger.  
      For these reasons I find Mr. Ellis guilty on count 20 (personation of Bruce Geiger) and count 21 (use or trafficking in a forged document).
                                                      v.            Unconventional Payments
      Mr. Ellis testified that he used unconventional payments to pass funds to the Tieberts.  This evidence is simply not believable.  It defies common sense that lawyers would accept transfers of funds by some sort of a cash drop or through a payday loan account or though other means such as purchasing items at inflated prices at a coin and stamp store.  This is particularly so in the context of transactions that were represented to be valued at several millions of dollars.  Moreover, as I earlier described, the RBC response to the Production Order does not identify any RBC securities account associated with Mr. Ellis.
      Furthermore, in relation to many of the examples of transfers that I earlier referred to, Mr. Ellis’ emails specifically referred to the funds being “transferred”.  None of the communications in evidence make any reference to cash drops, delivery of securities or paying inflated prices at a business in West Edmonton Mall.  Moreover, in most cases the transfers took place on the same day as the request was made.  This would make other forms of unconventional payments virtually impossible.  
        Mr. Ellis was not being truthful when he described the unconventional payments. Moreover, his evidence on this point does not give rise to reasonable doubt.
      Mr. Ellis testified that he had set up a Scotiabank Account in early 2017.  He “wanted to believe” that this account was used to send monies received from investors to the Tieberts.  I conclude that Mr. Ellis’s evidence in relation to the Scotiabank Account is not believable and is false.  
      Moreover, there is positive evidence that the Scotiabank Account did not exist.  A Production Order was served on Scotiabank that required the bank to produce “All Scotiabank account opening documents, banking statements … associated to Scotiabank client Nickolas Ellis”.  In response, a representative of Scotiabank identified three visa and loan accounts in the name of Mr. Ellis.  However, Scotiabank made no reference to any other accounts that may have contained the funds necessary to pay the large amounts that were apparently to be passed on to the Tieberts in relation to the Dynasty Project. This is more than an absence of evidence in relation to the alleged Scotiabank Account.  Instead, it is evidence of an absence of the Scotiabank Account.  It is positive evidence that the Scotiabank Account never existed.
      I find that Mr. Ellis did not have a Scotiabank Account that was used in relation to the transactions referred to in this prosecution.
                                                    vi.            Conclusion – The Dynasty Project Did Not Exist
      I conclude that Mr. Ellis, either alone or working in conjunction with some other unknown person or person, was responsible for using the Tieberts and Mike Bossy as a rouse to create the impression that substantial additional funds were required to ensure completion of the Dynasty Project that was worth millions of dollars or billions of dollars.  The scheme was elaborate and resulted in almost $1.2 million being deposited into Mr. Ellis’ personal RBC bank accounts.  These funds were used primarily to pay Mr. Ellis’ credit card debt or to discharge other of Mr. Ellis’ personal debt obligations. None of the funds were used to purchase or sell any technology to Microsoft or anyone else.
      There is no other viable alternate inference that could give rise to reasonable doubt that does not involve speculation. While the evidence in relation to the Dynasty Project is in many respects circumstantial, I am satisfied that the circumstantial evidence is overwhelming and gives rise to only one conclusion.
      I conclude that the Dynasty Project was a sham.  It was not real.  It existed only in the mind of Mr. Ellis.  It existed only for the purpose of extracting very large amounts of money from Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki.  The actions of Mr. Ellis were dishonest and deceitful. His actions resulted in each of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki being deprived of significant funds. Based on the totality of the evidence I conclude that Mr. Ellis knew that his deceit, falsehood and other dishonest acts would cause the deprivation on the part of each of the investors in the Dynasty Project.
      Moreover, even if the Dynasty Project had been real, the same interest was fraudulently sold to three different investors. 
      I find Mr. Ellis guilty of fraud over $5,000 on count 1 (Mr. Makowecki), count 5 (Mr. Blackburn) and count 10 (Mr. McLean).
d)     The Reebok Jersey Program
      The Agreed Statement of Facts proves that in 2017 and 2018 the NHL was discontinuing its relationship with Reebok for the supply of hockey jerseys and that the league was entering into a new relationship with Adidas. This transition became the genesis of the Reebok Jersey Program.
      I make the following findings of fact in relation to the Reebok Jersey Program.
      I find that Mr. Ellis represented to those who invested in the Reebok Jersey Program that because of his contacts with the NHL and with US-based distributors of sports memorabilia and other persons in the sports memorabilia industry, he had an opportunity to purchase an inventory of existing Reebok jerseys that would no longer be used in the NHL.  Mr. Ellis represented to these investors that the Reebok jerseys would be purchased and that some or all of them would be signed by NHL players.  The jerseys would then be framed and distributed for resale.  Significantly, Mr. Ellis represented to investors that a large portion of the jerseys had been presold to distributors and that the program would be completed in 2018.  This representation caused the investors to believe that the risk in relation to the project was minimal.
      All of Mr. McLean, Mr. Makowecki, Mr. Deleeuw (in the name of his wife, Debbie Deleeuw), Mr. Halliday, Mr. Lee and Mr. Hawman became investors in the Reebok Jersey Program. Between September 2017 and September 2018, these investors collectively paid Mr. Ellis or his proprietorship, B&G Group, more than $300,000 specifically with respect to this project. The amounts invested can be summarized as follows:
 



 Group 
 Members of Group 
 Date of First Investment  
 Initial Investment  
 Total Investment 


 Group 1 
 Mr. McLean 
 September 1, 2017 
 $25,000 
 $145,210 


 Group 2 
 Mr. Makowecki Mr. Deleeuw  Mr. Halliday 
 November 10, 2017 November 14, 2017 February 4, 2018 
 $39,375 $39,375 $39,375 
 $46,625 $18,219* $39,375 


 Group 3 
 Mr. Lee Mr. Hawman 
 April 5, 2018 April 5, 2018 
 $25,000 $25,000 
 $25,000 $25,000 



                        *Net of $21,156 that Mr. Deleeuw received from Mr. Ellis in May 2018
 
                                                        i.            Mr. McLean Invests in Reebok Jersey Program
      Mr. McLean made his first investment in the Reebok Jersey Program in September 2017 with a contribution of $25,000 that was deposited into Mr. Ellis’ personal joint RBC account on September 1, 2017. Mr. Ellis represented to Mr. McLean that he and Mr. Ellis were 50/50 partners in the project.
      The potential inventory list that Mr. Ellis had received from “Jack” was shared with Mr. McLean for the purpose of discussing which of the jerseys or other hockey equipment would be included in the program.
      Mr. Ellis explained to Mr. McLean that “the plan” was that he was going to pay the Edmonton Oilers $120,000 to purchase an inventory of jerseys for the program. On the strength of this representation, Mr. McLean then contributed additional investment funds in September and October 2017 so that his total Reebok Jersey Project investment was approximately 50% of the $120,000.  Thereafter Mr. McLean continued making contributions to the Jersey Program until October 2018.
      For the reasons I gave earlier, I reject Mr. Ellis’ evidence regarding his dealings with the Edmonton Oilers, or any of its employees in relation to the $120,000 “first big purchase”.  I reject Mr. Ellis’ evidence in relation to the alleged $15,000 cash payment for Oilers jerseys.  I reject Mr. Ellis’ evidence in relation to any discussions with the Oilers regarding the Reebok Jersey Program.  His evidence in this regard is in direct conflict with the Agreed Statement of Facts that provides in part:
... neither the Oilers Entities or the NHL have ever had any discussions with or been involved in any investments or businesses with either the Accused or the “B&G Group”, including the bulk sales of any team jerseys or equipment.
      More specifically, I conclude that the cheque in the amount of $120,000 payable to the “Edmonton Oilers Hockey Club” was nothing more than a prop used by Mr. Ellis to lend some legitimacy to the project for the purpose of inducing Mr. McLean to make further financial contributions to the project.
                                                      ii.            Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Deleeuw Invest in Reebok Jersey Program
      In October and early November 2017, Mr. Ellis began discussions with Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Deleeuw regarding the Reebok Jersey Program.  In emails dated October 16, 2017 and November 2, 2017 Mr. Ellis described the investment as proceeding in three phases with each phase being self-funding after the initial investment of $39,375.  The first phase involved the seven Canadian NHL teams.  Phase two involved seven US-based NHL teams and Phase three involved an additional seven US-based NHL teams.  Mr. Ellis explained in his email that each of the three phases were “50% allocated”. The anticipated return to each investor at the end of the third phase was estimated to be $219,313 on the investment of $39,375.
      In November 2017, Mr. Ellis downloaded a Joint Venture Agreement from the internet and completed the document to describe the rights and obligations of the parties in relation to the “Reebok Jersey Program”.  The parties to the Joint Venture Agreement were B&G Group (which was Mr. Ellis), Makow Properties Corp Ltd (Mr. Makowecki’s corporation), McLean Investments Ltd (Mr. McLean’s corporation) and Darcy Deleeuw (on behalf of his wife Debbie Deleeuw).  
      The Joint Venture Agreement specifically contemplated that Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Deleeuw along with Mr. McLean and Mr. Ellis would each have a 25% interest in the project. I find that while Mr. McLean was identified as one of the parties to the Joint Venture Agreement, he did not sign the agreement.  Moreover, Mr. McLean was never aware of any agreement that purported to give him a 25% interest in the project. At all times he understood that he had a 50% interest in the Reebok Jersey Program that he had purchased from Mr. Ellis in September 2017.
      The Joint Venture Agreement specified a cash contribution of $39,375 each, as had been described in Mr. Ellis’ earlier email. Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Deleeuw each paid this amount to B&G Group and the funds were deposited into Mr. Ellis’ B&G account at RBC on November 10, 2017 and November 14, 2017 respectively.
                                                    iii.            Mr. Halliday Invests in Reebok Jersey Program
      Mr. Halliday invested in the Reebok Jersey Program with a contribution of $39,375 paid by cheque dated February 4, 2018. This cheque was deposited into Mr. Ellis’ B&G account at RBC on February 5, 2018.  
      Both Mr. Ellis and Mr. Halliday participated in modifying the original Joint Venture Agreement that had been signed by Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Deleeuw.  The Joint Venture Agreement that was signed by Mr. Halliday had also purportedly been signed by Mr. McLean.  The handwritten amendment to the Joint Venture Agreement provides that “25% share transferred to Kent Halliday via Nick Ellis”.  An arrow from Mr. McLean’s signature leads directly to these words.  
      I find that Mr. McLean was not aware of this Joint Venture Agreement.  I find that Mr. McLean’s signature on the Joint Venture Agreement was a forgery.  I find that Mr. McLean did not at any time sell his September 2017 interest in the Reebok Jersey Program to Mr. Halliday or anyone else.
      Mr. Ellis acknowledged receiving the investment funds from Mr. Halliday in relation to the Reebok Jersey program and he acknowledged that he did not pass those funds on to Mr. McLean.
      After the execution of the amended Joint Venture Agreement the parties were B&G (Mr. Ellis), Makow Properties Corp Ltd (Mr. Makowecki), Debbie Deleeuw and Mr. Halliday.
      In early 2018, Mr. Deleeuw raised concerns with Mr. Ellis regarding the Reebok Jersey Program and ultimately on May 8, 2018, Mr. Ellis paid Debbie Deleeuw $21,165 as a partial return of this investment.  This cheque was honoured by the bank.
      In March 2019, Mr. Halliday also raised concerns with Mr. Ellis about the project.  In response to these concerns, Mr. Ellis gave Mr. Halliday a cheque in the amount of $321,447 written on the B&G account at RBC.  Mr. Ellis asked Mr. Halliday to hold the cheque for a few days so that he could move some money to cover the cheque. Instead of waiting, Mr. Halliday went to the bank to discover that there were insufficient funds in the account.  In any event, even if there had been sufficient funds in the account, the cheque could not have been honoured because the amount of the cheque as described numerically did not match the amount as written on the cheque.
                                                    iv.            Mr. Lee and Mr. Hawman Invest in Reebok Jersey Program
      In April 2018, Mr. Lee and Mr. Hawman invested in the Reebok Jersey Program pursuant to the terms of a Joint Venture Agreement dated April 5, 2018.  The parties to the agreement were “B&G Group (Nick Ellis)”, Mr. Lee and Mr. Hawman.  The Joint Venture Agreement provided that a capital contribution of $25,000 was required from each of the three joint venturers.  Mr. Hawman and Mr. Lee both made these capital contributions, and the funds were deposited into the RBC account in the name of B&G on April 2, 2018 and April 5, 2018 respectively.  
                                                      v.            No Disclosure of Other Investors in Reebok Jersey Program
      Mr. Ellis testified that he could not recall whether he disclosed to any of the investors in the Reebok Jersey Program the existence of other similar programs with other investors.  He testified as follows:
Q.        Okay.  Did you ever disclose to any of the investors in the separate projects the existence of the other projects and other investors?
A.        I don’t recall.
Q.        Okay.  That would certainly be something you would agree that they should know if you were running –
A.        I would not agree if they are three separate things then it’s none of their business.
      None of the investors in the Reebok Jersey Programs were aware that Mr. Ellis had entered into agreements with other investors that related to NHL jerseys.
                                                    vi.            Sale of Same Interest to Three Groups of Investors
      Mr. Ellis testified that the three groups of investors in the Reebok Jersey Program participated in distinctly different programs.  He testified that “the Jersey Project was in three different pieces with three different groups”.  He explained this in cross-examination:
Q.        Okay.  I’m quite confused the, I mean, in terms of keeping track of inventory and payments and what not, you must have had a pretty good accounting system to ensure that the three projects weren’t confused with one another.
A.        I don’t think you need an accounting system.
Q.        Okay.  So how did you know that any particular jersey at any particular time belonged to any of the three projects?
A.        Because I’ll say again, Terry and I moved into the Upper Deck jerseys which we were receiving.  And everybody else was in the Canadian team position or the other NHL teams, that’s not difficult.
      As I earlier described, the Joint Venture Agreement signed by Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Deleeuw in November 2017 (later to include Mr. Halliday) is for all practical purposes, identical to the Joint Venture Agreement that was signed by Mr. Lee and Mr. Hawman in April 2018.  I find that Mr. Ellis sold the very same interest in the Reebok Jersey Program to these two groups of investors.  However, even before dealing with Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Deleeuw, the Reebok Jersey Program had been sold to Mr. McLean.  Thereafter, Mr. Ellis had nothing to sell to the other groups.  Mr. Ellis used nondisclosure agreements and other means to prevent the investors from discovering that their interest in the Reebok Jersey Program had been sold to others.  His conduct was dishonest and deceitful.
      The reference by Mr. Ellis to Upper Deck involved, amongst other things, a photo shoot in Las Vegas in relation to Connor McDavid’s 21st birthday.  Mr. Ellis represented that Mr. Wong would be the photographer responsible for the photos.  Mr. McLean made additional investments in the project to finance Mr. Wong’s expenses associated with travel to Las Vegas and the costs incurred in the photo shoot.  As I will describe later in these reasons, this photo shoot did not take place.  Mr. Wong was never retained to do such a photo shoot and he did not travel to Las Vegas for this purpose. 
       The Agreed Statement of Facts proves that Upper Deck has never had any discussions with or been involved in any investments or businesses with either Mr. Ellis or the “B&G Group”.  I find that the Upper Deck “piece” that Mr. Ellis testified to did not exist.  It was pure fiction. I find that the Upper Deck “piece” was a further false narrative presented by Mr. Ellis to induce Mr. McLean to make further contributions to the project.
                                                  vii.            Wei Wong was Not Involved in the Reebok Jersey Program
      Mr. Ellis represented to each of the Reebok Jersey Program investors that Mr. Wei Wong of Vestate would be involved in the framing of the jerseys so that they could be forwarded to distributors for sale.  Prior to making their investment, each of the investors were taken to the Vestate premises for a tour.  All agreed that it was a very impressive facility.  All had confidence that Vestate and Mr. Wong had the skill and experience to professionally frame and process the jerseys as part of the Reebok Jersey Program.  
      Mr. Ellis did speak to Mr. Wong about a potential large framing project and Mr. Wong was interested in participating in the project.  However, Mr. Wong testified, and I find, that he never became involved with the Reebok Jersey Program or any similar program involving Mr. Ellis. 
      Mr. Wong did frame some jerseys for Mr. Ellis in 2017 and 2018.  However, this work was for Mr. Ellis’ personal collection.  The number of jerseys framed was small and not of the commercial nature suggested by the Reebok Jersey Program
      I find that Mr. Ellis used the name and reputation of Mr. Wong and the tours of the Vestate facility to add an air of authenticity to the Reebok Jersey Program and in this way induced investors to make financial contributions to the project.  
      An email account, wwedmphotographer@***** was used for the purpose of sending emails purportedly from Mr. Wong to one or more of the investors or groups of investors, usually through Mr. Ellis. For example:
•         on March 28, 2018, Mr. Ellis forwarded to Mr. Lee an email purportedly from Mr. Wong through the wwedmphotographer@***** account which reported that 190 jerseys had been shipped on March 27, 2018, another 190 jerseys were to be shipped that day, March 28, 2018 and that another 190 jerseys would be shipped by mid-April 2018.  This email was sent to Mr. Lee as he and Mr. Hawman were considering whether they would invest in the Reebok Jersey Program.  
All the representations in the email purportedly from Mr. Wong were false.  
Within a few days of receiving this email Mr. Lee and Mr. Hawman made their investment in the Reebok Jersey Program.  Each provided Mr. Ellis with a cheque for $25,000. These funds were deposited in Mr. Ellis’s personal RBC accounts.
•         in June 2018 the wwedmphotographer@***** email account was used to send a series of emails to Mr. Ellis and Mr. McLean that described the work that Mr. Wong had been doing in Las Vegas with Upper Deck in relation to a series of photographs of NHL players.  Mr. Wong explained that Upper Deck wanted to pre-order 100,000 framed photographs that were to be taken at an awards ceremony in Las Vegas.  
All the representations in the purported email from Mr. Wong were false.  
The purported email from Mr. Wong came with a request for funds to cover expenses.  As a result of these emails Mr. McLean paid Mr. Ellis over $11,000 as his share of the purported expenses.
•         on August 5, 2018, the wwedmphotographer@***** email account was used to send an email to Mr. Ellis and Mr. McLean.  This email reported on Mr. Wong’s trip to Las Vegas for the purpose of a photo shoot for Connor McDavid’s 21st birthday. The email represented that “UD [Upper Deck] is working nice with my team and we sent the photos for signature and authentication for McDavid and authentication for all other.  There (sic) is 75% sold of all photos taken in Vegas and expected to receive $400K from UD by August 31.  Jersey sales will be complete by September 1 and last shipment sent to Scott last week”. 
All the representations in the purported email from Mr. Wong were false.
      Mr. Wei Wong testified that he did not create and has never had an email account by the name wwedmphotographer@*****. I find that Mr. Wong was not the author of any emails that originated from that account. I find that Mr. Wong was never in Las Vegas for a photo shoot in relation to Connor McDavid’s 21st birthday or for any work in relation to the Upper Deck “piece” that Mr. Ellis referred to. 
      The Agreed Statement of Facts proves that the wwedmphotographer@***** email account was created on January 21, 2018.  The person who set up this email account provided a phone number.  That number was 604 562 ****.  This is a telephone number that Mr. Ellis acknowledged he has used for many years.  
      The Crown submits that I should infer that the wwedmphotographer@***** email account was created and used by Mr. Ellis for the purpose of enticing additional investment in the Reebok Jersey Program.  This is a possible inference that can be made from the evidence, but before arriving at a conclusion in relation to this inference I first need to consider other alternate inferences that would potentially give rise to reasonable doubt.
      One alternate inference is that some unknown and unrelated person created the wwedmphotographer@***** email account and used it to communicate with the investors in the Reebok Jersey Program.  I have considered this alternate inference and conclude that this would be an unreasonable inference in the circumstances.  All of the emails from this account were tailored to achieve a benefit for Mr. Ellis.  No unrelated person benefited from these emails.  This alternate theory is entirely speculative, and the Crown has no obligation to rebut the theory.
      Another alternate inference is that some unknown person or persons worked in conjunction with Mr. Ellis to create and use the wwedmphotographer@***** email account.  This alternate theory does not give rise to reasonable doubt because under this theory Mr. Ellis would still be a party to the offence. 
      I infer that Mr. Ellis, alone or in conjunction with an unknown person or persons, created the wwedmphotographer@***** email account and was responsible for the emails that were sent from the account.  Not only was Mr. Ellis’ phone number associated with the email account, but the emails sent from the account were clearly intended to provide comfort regarding the legitimacy of the project with a view to inducing investment in the project or to explain the delays in the completion of the project.  The investments in the Reebok Jersey Program were all deposited into one or more of Mr. Ellis’ personal RBC accounts.  He was the only person who derived any benefit from the emails coming from the wwedmphotographer@***** email account.
      There is no other reasonable explanation that could give rise to reasonable doubt.
      I find that the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Ellis used, trafficked, or possessed the forged emails created on the wwedmphotographer@***** email account.  Even if Mr. Ellis did not act alone in sending the emails, he certainly shared a common intention with the author of the emails to craft deceptive messages for Mr. Ellis’ own benefit, and in that way, was a party to the offences.
      For these reasons I find Mr. Ellis guilty on count 22 (personation of Wei Wong) and count 23 (use or trafficking in a forged document).
                                                viii.            John Wong Texts
      In January 2019, Mr. Hawman received a text message purportedly from a lawyer, John Wong.  Mr. Wong told Mr. Hawman that he was representing Mr. Hawman and Mr. Lee in relation to the “Upper Deck Reebok Jersey Project”.  He was attempting to arrange for a meeting to discuss the project and the potential need for Canada wide incorporation.  
      The evidence regarding the texts from John Wong is extremely limited.  I am not able to draw any inferences or come to any conclusions from these texts.
                                                    ix.            Conclusion – The Reebok Jersey Program Did Not Exist
      When I consider the totality of the evidence, I infer that the Reebok Jersey Program was never real, but instead was a sham and was designed for only one purpose; to enrich Mr. Ellis at the expense of the investors.  I find that Mr. Ellis used a series of elaborate strategies designed to make it appear to the investors that the project was real and worthy of investment.  He used the false representations regarding a payment of $120,000 to the Oilers, the reputation of Mr. Wong, the tours of the Vestate facilities, the false wwedmphotographer@***** email account and reference to the involvement of sports personalities such as Connor McDavid to create a false impression of legitimacy.  
      Moreover, even if the Reebok Jersey Program had been real, the same interest was fraudulently sold to three different groups of investors. 
      The totality of the evidence does not permit any other potential explanation that could give rise to reasonable doubt regarding Mr. Ellis’ fraudulent actions in relation to the Reebok Jersey Program.
      Of the investors in the Reebok Jersey Program, only Mr. Deleeuw received any return.  He received from Mr. Ellis $21,156 in May 2018.  This reduced his loss on the project to $18,219. The remaining investors had no return and lost their entire investment, resulting in losses of approximately $300,000.
      For these reasons I find Mr. Ellis guilty of fraud over $5,000 on Count 1 (Mr. Makowecki), Count 6 (Mr. Deleeuw or his wife), count 8 (Mr. Lee), Count 9 (Mr. Hawman), count 10 (Mr. McLean) and count 13 (Mr. Halliday).  As I noted earlier, I also found Mr. Ellis guilty on Counts 1 and 10 in relation to the Dynasty Project.
e)      The Bridge Financing Project
      I make the following findings of fact in relation to the Bridge Financing Project.
      In November 2017, Mr. Ellis approached Mr. Nikicevic regarding an investment opportunity involving bridge financing of commercial buildings which had reached the final construction stage but had not yet been sold.  I find that Mr. Ellis represented that a total of nine persons were involved in the investment group and that each participant contributed funds to carry the cost of the building until such time as it was sold. On the sale of the building, the bridge financing was to be repaid along with a portion of the profit from the transaction.
      I find that Mr. Ellis represented that two of the members of the investment group were Kevin Lowe and Craig McTavish.  Mr. Nikicevic knew these two persons to be retired NHL players then associated with the Edmonton Oilers.  Mr. Ellis’ point of contact with the investment group was represented to be Kevin Lowe.
      I find that Mr. Ellis represented to Mr. Nikicevic that all the nine investors would contribute the same amount to the investment, $24,500.  On November 1, 2017, Mr. Nikicevic gave Mr. Ellis a bank draft in the amount of $24,500 and this was deposited into Mr. Ellis’ B&G account at RBC on the same day.  However, the RBC banking records do not show that the contribution from Mr. Nikicevic was passed on by Mr. Ellis to Kevin Lowe or anyone else who may have been managing the Bridge Financing Project.
      On or about December 5, 2017, Mr. Ellis approached Mr. Nikicevic and explained that one of the nine investors in the group was leaving and that it was necessary that they purchase his interest.  Mr. Ellis explained that each of them would need to contribute an additional $15,750 for a total payment to the exiting investor of $31,500.  Mr. Nikicevic complied and gave Mr. Ellis a second bank draft, this one was in the amount of $15,750.  The RBC banking records show that these funds were deposited into Mr. Ellis’ B&G account at RBC on December 5, 2017.  The RBC banking records do not show a payment from Mr. Ellis’ RBC accounts in the amount of $31,500 (or $15,750 or any other amount) to the exiting investor or to anyone else.
      I find that over the next several months, Mr. Ellis reported to Mr. Nikicevic on the status of the investment.  All the reports were general in nature: “going great” and “we have some interest”.  In April 2018, Mr. Ellis reported that the property had been sold and that Mr. Nikicevic’s share of the proceeds was $75,000.  I find that during that discussion Mr. Ellis represented to Mr. Nikicevic that these funds had been rolled over to a new opportunity.
      Placement of the proceeds from the first transaction into a second transaction caused Mr. Nikicevic some real concern.  Very shortly after making his first investment, Nr. Nikicevic asked Mr. Ellis for some documentation regarding the investment including, for example, the land titles documents.  Mr. Ellis promised to provide these documents, but they were never forthcoming.  For this reason, Mr. Nikicevic was concerned about any involvement with the second investment.  However, since Mr. Ellis was his employer, Mr. Nikicevic felt constrained as to how forcefully he could express his concern.
      I find that some months later, Mr. Ellis told Mr. Nikicevic that the second building had been sold and that the proceeds were to be distributed.  I find that Mr. Ellis explained that the distribution would take place at the Derrick Club.  Mr. Nikicevic arranged to meet Mr. Ellis at the Derrick Club at the appointed time to collect his portion of the proceeds.  However, when he arrived at the Derrick Club Mr. Ellis was not there.
      Mr. Ellis and Mr. Nikicevic spoke later about the missed meeting and Mr. Ellis explained that “I got hung up”.  Mr. Ellis explained that he would set up another meeting at the Derrick Club to distribute the funds.  Once again Mr. Nikicevic went to the Derrick Club, but Mr. Ellis was not there.  Neither were Kevin Lowe or Craig McTavish.
      Several months later, after both Mr. Nikicevic and Mr. Ellis had been terminated from Barcol, they met by chance at a Home Depot in Sherwood Park.  Despite his representation months earlier that the second project had been sold, Mr. Ellis explained that the investment was “not quite ready”. Mr. Ellis told Mr. Nikicevic that as a sign of good faith, he would give Mr. Nikicevic $100,000.  He then provided Mr. Nikicevic with a cheque in the amount of $100,000 written on the B&G account at RBC.  Mr. Ellis asked Mr. Nikicevic to hold the cheque for a few days so the funds could be moved.  
      Mr. Nikicevic attempted to negotiate the cheque two days later, March 15, 2019.  The cheque was dishonoured by the bank. The total amount in the B&G account at that time was $281.
      As I described earlier in these reasons, Mr. Ellis had also given Mr. Halliday a cheque dated March 15, 2019 written on the B&G account.  The amount of the cheque was $231,442.  Mr. Halliday also took this cheque to the bank to find that there were insufficient funds in the account to honour the cheque.  As I will describe shortly, Mr. Ellis also provided Mr. Halliday a second cheque at the same time, also payable on the B&G account. The amount of this cheque was $652,000 and was intended to be a shareholders loan in relation to the Barcol acquisition. 
      I find that Mr. Ellis’ gesture of good faith in providing the $100,000 cheque to Mr. Nikicevic was not in any way genuine.  I find that Mr. Ellis was simultaneously using the RBC B&G account to attempt to satisfy total obligations of almost $1 million.  But the account had virtually no positive balance.  Mr. Ellis’s gesture was disingenuous.  
      I find that neither Kevin Lowe nor Craig McTavish were involved in the bridge financing project. I find Mr. Ellis’ explanation that the project involved “some guys at the golf course” is false.  
      I infer that the bridge financing project was never real.  Instead, it was a sham that was designed to enrich Mr. Ellis at the expense of Mr. Nikicevic.  
      The alternate theory that the Bridge Financing Project was real and involved a “group of guys” at the golf course is completely inconsistent with the representations that were made by Mr. Ellis at or near the time that the investments were made.  Mr. Ellis represented that the group of investors included Kevin Lowe and Craig McTavish not a “group of guys” at the golf course.  Moreover, Mr. Ellis represented that the investment was concluded, and that the payout would be made at the Derrick Club. There are no alternate theories that can give rise to reasonable doubt.  
      Mr. Nikicevic invested a total of $40,250 in the bridge financing project which was paid to B&G Group, Mr. Ellis’ proprietorship.  All these funds were lost.
      Mr. Ellis’ conduct in relation to the Bridge Financing Project was dishonest and deceitful and resulted in Mr. Nikicevic being deprived of $40,250.  I find that Mr. Ellis was aware that his dishonesty and deception would result in this deprivation.
      I find Mr. Ellis guilty of fraud over $5,000 in relation to count 12.
f)       The Barcol Acquisition Project
      I find that in or about late 2018 or early 2019, Mr. Ellis separately approached each of Mr. Makowecki, Mr. Deleeuw and Mr. Halliday regarding an opportunity to invest in the acquisition of an interest in Barcol.  When presenting the proposals, Mr. Ellis represented that the owner of Barcol, Kim Mihalcheon, was experiencing serious health issues and that she wanted to sell Barcol quickly.
      I find that to persuade Mr. Makowecki to invest in the Barcol Acquisition Project, Mr. Ellis represented that he would install Mr. Makowecki as the Chairman of the Board of Barcol. Mr. Makowecki was interested in the proposal to purchase Barcol.  However, he advised Mr. Ellis that he was only interested in doing so with professional advice and assistance from his accountants and lawyers.  The discussions with Mr. Makowecki went no further and an investment was not made.
      Mr. Deleeuw was also interested in participating in a potential acquisition of Barcol.  Mr. Deleeuw took the opportunity to undertake some due diligence by contacting an accountant, Mr. Severin.  As a result of that due diligence Mr. Deleeuw declined to participate.
      I find that Mr. Ellis also approached Mr. Halliday to invest in the Barcol Acquisition Project.  On January 24, 2019, Mr. Halliday agreed to participate.  He did so by paying Mr. Ellis $25,000 for a 50% interest in B&G Group Ltd.  The remaining shares in B&G Group Ltd were to be owned by Mr. Ellis so that Mr. Ellis and Mr. Halliday would “be partners in the venture”.  Mr. Ellis represented that B&G Group Ltd was at that time in the process of acquiring 93.75% ownership in Barcol and 23.5% ownership of Steelcraft.  
      After making the investment of $25,000 on January 24, 2019 to purchase a 50% interest in B&G Group Ltd, Mr. Halliday also made a further investment of $24,475 on March 8, 2019 with a cheque payable to B&G Group for the purpose of obtaining the Minute Book of the corporation from the corporate solicitor, Mr. John Huckle.  
      Mr. Ellis acknowledged that he had never spoken to Ms. Mihalcheon about the potential for a purchase of Steelcraft.  He explained however that Ms. Mihalcheon had expressed an interest in keeping a small stake in Barcol.  Mr. Ellis reasoned that if he expressed an interest in purchasing a small piece of Steelcraft this might persuade Ms. Micalcheon to agree to sell 100% of Barcol in exchange for Mr. Ellis not seeking to purse the small interest in Steelcraft.
      Mr. Ellis testified that to further pursue the acquisition, Mr. Ellis approached two banks, including RBC, with a business plan.  He testified that he was fairly confident that he could obtain financing of approximately $3 - 3.5 million with which to pursue the acquisition of Barcol.  I observe that the RBC response to the Production Order makes no reference to an application for a $3 - $3.5 million loan in relation to the purchase of Barcol. 
      In March 2019 when Mr. Halliday raised concerns regarding the investment, Mr. Ellis gave Mr. Halliday a cheque in the amount of $652,000 drawn on the RBC account of B&G Group.  This cheque was to represent a shareholder’s loan to Mr. Halliday from B&G and was to be funded from the financing that Mr. Ellis testified he expected to receive from one of the banks he had approached to fund the purchase of Barcol.  Mr. Ellis asked Mr. Halliday to hold the cheque for a few days before negotiating it.  Mr. Halliday did not do this and instead discovered that there were insufficient funds in the account to honour the cheque.  As I explained earlier in these reasons, the balance in Mr. Ellis’ B&G account at RBC account at that time was $281.
      I find that the proposal to purchase Barcol was not real. Mr. Ellis had absolutely no basis in fact to represent that B&G Group Ltd. was in process of acquiring 93.75% ownership in Barcol and 23.5% ownership of Seelcraft.  This was dishonest and a deception designed extract funds from Mr. Halliday only for the purpose enriching Mr. Ellis.
      I find that B&G Group Ltd never existed as a corporate entity and that Mr. Ellis could not possibly have conveyed shares to Mr. Halliday.  I further find that Barcol was never for sale, that Ms. Mihalcheon was not experiencing health related issues and she had no interest in selling Barcol. As a result, there are no alternate theories that could give rise to reasonable doubt.
      Mr. Halliday received nothing in return for his investment in the Barcol acquisition project. It was a total loss.
      I find Mr. Ellis guilty of fraud over $5,000 on Count 13.  Earlier in these reasons I also found Mr. Ellis guilty on Count 13 in relation to the Reebok Jersey Program.
g)      Other Projects – Telus and Gretzky
      In May 2018, Mr. Makowecki participated in two additional investments with Mr. Ellis, both of which were said to be related in some way to the Dynasty Project or the Reebok Jersey Program. 
                                                        i.            Telus Project
      The Telus project related to the development of additional software for Telus.  This project involved the same computer programmer, or coder, who had been used in relation to the Dynasty Project.  The Telus project also involved the same “lawyer” as had been used in relation to the Dynasty Project.  Mr. Makowecki agreed to participate in this opportunity and gave Mr. Ellis a cheque in the amount of $30,375 on May 2, 2018.  These funds were deposited to Mr. Ellis’ day-to-day banking account at RBC on May 3, 2018.  This was only a few days after Mr. Makowecki received a copy of the forged Miller Thomson letter that purported to confirm that $33 million was being held in trust for the Dynasty Project.
      There is very little evidence before me in relation to the Telus project.  I find that Mr. Makowecki’s investment in the project was given to Mr. Ellis and that Mr. Makowecki did not get any return from the project.  I also find that the project was represented to be related to the Dynasty Project that I have found was a sham.  However, there is insufficient evidence before me to in relation to the Telus Project to satisfy me that the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt fraudulent conduct on the part of Mr. Ellis in relation to this project.  Thus, the evidence in relation to the Telus Project plays no part in my decision with respect to the charges on the Amended Indictment against Mr. Ellis.
                                                      ii.            Gretzky Project
      Mr. Makowecki received an email from Mr. Ellis dated May 7, 2018 which reported that “we have a huge opportunity with Upper Deck and a Wayne Gretzky collection”. This was approximately five days after he made the $30,375 investment in the Telus Project.  More importantly, the Gretzky Project arose one week after Mr. Makowecki received the letter from Miller Thomson confirming that they held $33 million in trust for the Dynasty Project.  This letter was a forgery and Miller Thomson did not hold any money for the Dynasty Project, but this did not become known to Mr. Makowecki until several months later.
      Attached to Mr. Ellis’ email dated May 7, 2018 was an email from “Mike Phillips VP Sales”.  The email does not say specifically which company Mr. Phillips was associated with, but the strong implication is that he held himself out to be with Upper Deck.  
      Mr. Phillip’s email described a licencing arrangement for nine new collections of limited issue merchandise relating to Wayne Gretzky.  The project involved a financial commitment totalling $225,000 with Upper Deck paying 50% and Mr. Ellis and Mr. Makowecki each contributing 25%.  The contribution of Mr. Ellis and Mr. Makowecki was to total $112,500.  In accordance with this arrangement Mr. Makowecki paid Mr. Ellis $56,250 which was deposited into Mr. Ellis RBC account on May 9, 2018.  
      A further contribution of $38,649 was paid by Mr. Makowecki to Mr. Ellis and deposited to Mr. Ellis’ RBC account on May 31, 2018.  
      Mr. Ellis also represented that Mr. Wei Wong would be involved in this project.  An email purportedly from Mr. Wong via the wwedmphotographer@***** account was also provided to Mr. Makowecki.  This email further promoted the project.  I have earlier found that the wwedmphotographer@***** account was not created or operated by Mr. Wong but was instead created and operated by Mr. Ellis.
      The RBC banking records show that Mr. Makowecki’s funds in relation to the Gretzky project were deposited into Mr. Ellis’s RBC account.  However, there is no corresponding entry in the records to show that Mr. Makowecki’s contribution and an equal contribution from Mr. Ellis were forwarded on to Upper Deck or to anyone else.  I find that Mr. Ellis kept Mr. Makowecki’s investment funds for his own use.  He did not pass the funds on to Upper Deck or any other person who should properly have received the funds.
      As I previously discussed, the Agreed Statement of Facts proves that Upper Deck “has never had discussions with or been involved in any investments or business with either the Accused or the “B&G Group”.  Therefore, despite his representations to Mr. Makowecki, Mr. Ellis did not have any relationship with Upper Deck with respect to the Gretzky Project, or anything else.
      Mr. Makowecki lost his entire investment in relation to the Gretzky project.
      When I consider the totality of the evidence, I infer that the Gretzky Project was a sham.  It was not real.  It existed only in the mind of Mr. Ellis.  It existed only for the purpose of extracting very large amounts of money from Mr. Makowecki.  The actions of Mr. Ellis were dishonest and deceitful. There is no alternate inference that is reasonable given all of the circumstances.
      Mr. Ellis’ actions resulted in Mr. Makowecki being deprived of significant funds.  Given all the circumstances I conclude that Mr. Ellis knew that his deceit, falsehood and other dishonest acts would cause the deprivation.
      I find Mr. Ellis guilty of fraud over $5,000 on Count 1 (Mr. Makowecki).  Earlier in these reasons I found Mr. Ellis guilty on count 1 in relation to both the Dynasty Project and the Reebok Jersey Program.
VII.            Crown Failed to Prove Counts 7, 15 and 24 Beyond a Reasonable Doubt
      Notwithstanding that I do not believe Mr. Ellis and notwithstanding that his evidence does not leave me with reasonable doubt in relation to most of the counts on the Amended Indictment, I conclude that the Crown has failed to prove three of counts beyond a reasonable doubt. 
a)      Count 7 – Attempted Fraud
      The Crown submits that when Mr. Ellis approached Mr. Deleeuw in relation to the Barcol acquisition project, he was attempting to commit a fraud.  I conclude that the Crown has not proven the elements of this offence beyond a reasonable doubt.
      Mr. Ellis was being dishonest when he was told Mr. Deleeuw that Ms. Mihalcheon had cancer.  Mr. Ellis was not being candid with Mr. Deleeuw when he said that Ms. Mihalcheon was a motivated seller.  
      However, Mr. Ellis testified that Barcol required some structural changes to make it more efficient. In particular, he observed that there was a problem with the relationship between Steelcraft as the parent company, and Barcol the subsidiary.  This was because Barcol could only sell Steelcraft products and was therefore “beholden to Steelcraft”.  For this reason, and given his background in acquisitions, Mr. Ellis felt that Barcol was an acquisition target.  There was no evidence to suggest that this was not Mr. Ellis’ legitimate opinion at the time.  
      Mr. Ellis has experience in the acquisition of companies and in his opinion, even though Ms. Mihalcheon may not have been a willing seller of Barcol, Mr. Ellis was of the view that “everything is for sale” if the price is right.  There is no evidence to suggest that this was not his honest opinion.
      Moreover, the discussions with Mr. Deleeuw were held in 2018, and were preliminary discussions only.  The discussions were very general.  No promises were made regarding what could be achieved.  Instead, the discussions consisted only of determining whether Mr. Deleeuw was interested in participating in an acquisition project.  Mr. Deleeuw did his own due diligence and concluded that he did not want to participate.
      The discussions with Mr. Deleeuw were much different from the discussions with Mr. Halliday, where very specific representations were made and where Mr. Halliday was sold shares of a non-existent corporation.
      I have reasonable doubt as to whether the conduct of Mr. Ellis was fraudulent in relation to his dealings with Mr. Deleeuw and the Barcol Acquisition project.
      I find Mr. Ellis not guilty on Count 7.
b)     Count 15 – Barcol Expense Claims
      The Crown submits that Mr. Ellis is guilty of fraud under $5,000 in relation to two specific expense claims that were made by Mr. Ellis in September and October 2018.  
                                                        i.            Fins and Skins
      The first of the expense claims related to reimbursement of the cost of flights for several persons who participated in a “fins and skins” event.  I find that Mr. Ellis booked and paid for flights for 12 persons including himself, Mr. Deleeuw, Mr. Halliday, Mr. Makowecki, Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and some Barcol employees.  The flights departed Edmonton on Tuesday, September 11, 2018 for Abbotsford B.C. and returned to Edmonton on Saturday, September 15, 2018.  The total cost of the flights was $4,251.  
      On September 6, 2018, prior to the flights departing, Mr. Ellis submitted an expense claim to Barcol which included the cost of the flights along with other expenses that were unrelated to the “fins and skins” trip.  The total of the expense claim was $6,528.87.  Barcol paid this claim, and the amount was deposited into Mr. Ellis’ RBC bank account on the same day as the claim was submitted, September 6, 2018.  The flights then departed five days later, September 11, 2018.
      Mr. Halliday testified that he paid for the fishing component of the “fins and skins” trip. However, he confirmed that Barcol paid for the flight.  He explained that the “fins and skins” trip was a business trip for members of the Barcol team and customers.  He participated in the trip because of his expressed interest in joining Barcol.  He explained that Mr. Ellis told him that it was very important for him to be on the trip. From a business perspective, payment of Mr. Halliday’s flight costs may or may not have been in accordance with corporate policy.  However, I conclude that the payment for Mr. Halliday’s air travel is far removed from fraud.
      Mr. Makowecki testified that he paid for all his expenses in relation to the “fins and skins” trip. He said that he paid for his own flight and that he gave Mr. Ellis a cheque for the cost of the fishing.  I accept that Mr. Makowecki may have given a cheque to Mr. Ellis for the fishing.  But the records from Swoop Airlines tendered by the Crown show that Mr. Ellis paid for Mr. Makowecki’s flight.  It is possible that Mr. Makowecki reimbursed Mr. Ellis for the cost of the flight.  If this happened, it is unclear from the evidence whether this was before or after Mr. Ellis submitted the expense claim.
      Mr. McLean testified to the same effect.  He said that he paid for his expenses for the trip and that he paid for his own airfare.  However, I find that Mr. Ellis paid for Mr. McLean’s airfare.  It is certainly possible that Mr. McLean reimbursed Mr. Ellis for the cost of the airfare but, as was the case with Mr. Makowecki, it is unclear on the evidence whether this was before or after the trip or before or after Mr. Ellis submitted the expense claim.
      Mr. Deleeuw was less clear in his evidence.  Mr. Deleeuw explained that he probably traveled on Swoop Airlines for the trip.  I find that he did travel on Swoop Airlines for the trip and that Mr. Ellis paid for the cost of the trip and included this cost in his expense claim to Barcol.  Mr. Deleeuw said, and I accept, that he paid for the trip, but this must have been through a reimbursement to Mr. Ellis.  Mr. Deleeuw did not explain when he reimbursed Mr. Ellis.  Specifically, he did not say whether this was before or after Mr. Ellis submitted the expense claim to Barcol.  
      I find that Barcol paid Mr. Ellis for the cost of airfare for each of Mr. Makowecki, Mr. McLean and Mr. Deleeuw.  I also find that some portions of the airfare were also paid by one or more of Mr. Makowecki, Mr. McLean and Mr. Deleeuw.  However, the evidence falls short of proving fraud beyond a reasonable doubt.  There remains a reasonable possibility that when he submitted the expense claim to Barcol, Mr. Ellis had not been reimbursed for any of the airfare by any of Mr. Makowecki, Mr. McLean or Mr. Deleeuw.  
      To find fraud I would need to infer that Mr. Ellis intended to deprive Barcol. To make this interference, I would need to conclude that there are no other reasonable inferences that are consistent with reasonable doubt.  One reasonable inference is that when he submitted the expense claim Mr. Ellis assumed that Barcol was to pay for the airfare for all participants because he assumed that it was a reasonable business expense, even though Ms. Mihalcheon or Barcol may have had a different view of the reasonableness of the expense.  
      A further alternative is that Mr. Ellis simply made an error in his accounting for the costs associated with the trip.  
      When Mr. Makowecki, Mr. McLean and Mr. Deleeuw reimbursed Mr. Ellis he had an obligation to account to Barcol for the amounts he received.  However, merely because he may have had an obligation to repay Barcol for a portion of the cost of the airfare does not make his conduct fraudulent.  The Crown needs to prove intent beyond a reasonable doubt, and it has failed to do so.
                                                      ii.            Oilers Suite Expense
      Barcol and Steelcraft leased a suite at Rogers Place for the purpose of entertaining customers and employees at events such as Oilers games.
      In October 2018 Mr. Ellis entertained several guests at one of the Oilers games.  While at the game, he and his guests incurred expenses for meals in the amount of $2,603.14 plus GST.  Mr. Ellis submitted a claim to Barcol and included this and other expenses for reimbursement.  The total amount claimed was $4,612.85.  The date of the expense report is October 18, 2018, however it is likely that this date is in error since one of the entries on the expense report is October 22, 2018, four days after the date of he expense report.
      The Steelcraft Controller during the relevant time was Gerald Telidetzki.  He testified that a procedure had been set up so that the meal expenses incurred at the Oilers games were automatically paid for by the Steelcraft corporate credit card.  However, the Steecraft or Barcol employee who was hosting guests at the suite would also receive a statement of the expenses incurred.
      Mr. Telidetzki testified that a cheque was produced by Barcol dated October 30, 2018 payable to Mr. Ellis in the amount of $4,612.85.
      The Crown argues that by submitting an expense claim in relation to a meal expense that was paid for by the Steelcraft credit card, Mr. Ellis’ conduct was fraudulent.  I conclude that the Crown has failed to prove fraud beyond a reasonable doubt in relation to the Oilers suite expense.  
      While Mr. Telidetzki produced a cheque stub showing the payment to Mr. Ellis, there is no evidence that this cheque was ever cashed.  The Crown has produced extensive RBC banking records which track all the deposits of the $1.7 million of investment funds that were received by Mr. Ellis.  But those same records do not show any deposit in the amount of $4,612.85.  It is possible that the Barcol cheque was negotiated in some other fashion.  But this would be inconsistent with Mr. Ellis’ pattern of depositing all cheques in his RBC accounts.  A finding of fraud cannot be made based on a possibility that Mr. Ellis used some other means of negotiating the Barcol cheque.
      I conclude that in relation to this expense claim, the Crown has failed to prove the deprivation element of fraud beyond a reasonable doubt.
      I find Mr. Ellis not guilty on Count 15.
c)      Count 24 – Impersonating a Police Officer
      On or shortly after September 10, 2018, Mr. Makowecki learned that Miller Thomson was not holding $33 million in trust for the Dynasty Project.  This caused him substantial concern.  As a result, he began to apply pressure on Mr. Ellis to deliver documentation relating to the Dynasty Project so that he could be satisfied of its legitimacy.  
      During these discussions Mr. Ellis reported to Mr. Makowecki that the Dynasty Project was on hold because Mr. Ellis’ brother and a banker were being investigated by the RCMP in relation to some potentially fraudulent activity involving funds related to the Dynasty Project.  Mr. Ellis told Mr. Makowecki that he would be contacted by the RCMP to obtain information regarding the issue.
      The Agreed Statement of Facts proves that Mr. Ellis’ statements regarding RCMP investigation of Mr. Ellis’ brother and the banker are false.  There never was such an investigation.
      On October 5, 2018 Mr. Makowecki received a text message a person identifying himself as Paul Desjardins.  The person introduced himself in the following way:
Hello Boris.  My name is Paul Desjardins and I am the lead investigator and handler for Nick Ellis.  We will be formally reaching out to you early next (sic) to bring you up to speed.  I can tell you that you have nothing to be worried about.  Save this number and I will provide my details and additional information.  Enjoy your weekend.  Paul.
(emphasis added)
      Mr. Makowecki followed up with Mr. Desjardins by text message on multiple occasions but did not receive a substantive response until October 27, 2018 when he received another message from the same telephone number.  That message said:
We are very aware Boris thank you.  Just an FYI Nick had done everything we asked and the outcome will not be affected by the additional investigation. You both have nothing to worry about.
(emphasis added)
      After a few days Mr. Makowecki received another text message from the same number.  That text message said:
Boris we have just executed 2 arrest warrants.  Nick will be with you shortly he will have some details for you.  You are cleared to meet with the lawyers on Friday before you depart.  We understand this has not been easy but you both have been protected.  It will all make sense!
      The exchange of text messages makes it clear that by early November 2019 Mr. Makowecki had serious reservations as to the legitimacy of Paul Desjardins and whether he was a police officer.  On November 2, 2018 Mr. Makowecki sent a text to the number and asked for Paul Desjardins’s email address. The address was never provided.
      On November 5, 2018 Mr. Makowecki sent a further test which said:
Hi Paul … can I respectfully ask for your email address?  And furthermore, can I ask who you work for?  Thank you Paul, Boris.
      Paul responded on November 5, 2019 and said that some information would be coming in the next two days.  This prompted Mr. Makowecki to send another text message:
Thanks Paul, but my question is who do you work for, please advise.
      Mr. Makowecki received a message in response, but the message contained none of the information requested.  Therefore Mr. Makowecki sent two further text messages also on November 5, 2018:
Paul, you need to tell me who you work for … it’s not about patience.  Every one is fuck’in with me and my capital.  If someone doesn’t come out clean with me, I will be going to K-Division and the Alberta Securities Com … TODAY.  Thank you.
Nick told me you’re an RCMP, I had you checked out and surprise, you are not.  You would tell me who you are if you’re a legitimate investigator and would of come and seen me days ago.  Paul, if you’re not identifying who you are, it’s ok … I’m doing my own thing to protect my investment.  Regards, Boris Makowecki.
      The text messages continued but Mr. Makowecki received none of the substantive information that he asked for including Paul’s email address, his badge number or who he was working for.  Ultimately after several delays, Mr. Makowecki left for his holiday in Mexico.  On November 16, 2018 Paul provided further assurances and explained that if a meeting was required he would travel to Mexico to meet Mr. Makowecki.  The text reads, in part:
… We will call you on Tuesday at a time chosen by you.  The call will be to relay specifics about us and the investigation.  Again the money is safe and accounted for fully.  If an in person meeting is necessary I do have approval for Mexico.
(emphasis added)
      Arrangements were made for a meeting at a restaurant in Mexico but when Mr. Makowecki arrived, Paul was not there. While in the restaurant Mr. Makowecki received a text from Paul who explained that he was “watching someone watch you” and no meeting could take place until “we regroup”.  Mr. Makowecki responded by text saying “This is crap” and that there was no one watching him. Mr. Makowecki sent a further text to Paul:
If you have people watching the guy watching me – question – what am I wearing?
      Paul responded by saying that “there are no games here boris we will be in touch”
      Mr. Makowecki never heard from Paul again.
      The Agreed Statement of Facts proves that Paul Desjardins is not employed with the RCMP and that the telephone number from which the texts came is not a telephone number belonging to the RCMP.
      In all of the circumstances I infer that Mr. Ellis, either alone or in concert with other persons, was responsible for communicating with Mr. Makowecki via text message while posing as Paul Desjardin.  I make this inference based on:
•         the Agreed Statement of Facts; 
•         the fact that the messages began when Mr. Makowecki expressed concerns over the forged Miller Thomson letter; 
•         the fact that Mr. Makowecki was applying pressure to get documentation from Mr. Ellis; 
•         the content of the texts was designed to pacify Mr. Makowecki, e.g.: “you have nothing to worry about" and “the money is safe and fully accounted for”.
      There is no other explanation that could possibly explain someone else being behind the text messages.
      Despite this, I find that the Crown has failed to prove this offence beyond a reasonable doubt.  The text messages do not represent that the sender is a peace officer.  The text messages from Paul Desjardin do represent that the sender is an “investigator”.  But nowhere in the text messages does the sender represent that he is a peace officer.  It is certainly arguable that some of the content of the messages could possibly lead to the inference that the author was holding himself out to be a peace officer, i.e. references to badge numbers, arrest warrants and to meeting with the Crown.  However, none of this was sufficient to permit Mr. Makowecki to believe that Paul was a peace officer.  Quite the opposite.  Mr. Makowecki asked very early on “who are you working for”.  
      In these circumstances I have reasonable doubt as to whether the sender of the text messages was holding himself out as a peace officer.  To the contrary, he was doing everything necessary to avoid this.  He did not say that he was RCMP and refused to provide information that would link them to the police.
      In all these circumstances I find Mr. Ellis not guilty on Count 24.
VIII.            Conclusion
      From February 2016 to March 2019, Mr. Ellis engaged in an elaborate scheme in which he presented several investment opportunities to eight of his friends, neighbours, and co-workers.  The investment opportunities were interconnected, and several investors participated in more than one opportunity.  
      The evidence with respect to many of the elements on most of the counts was circumstantial, but the circumstantial evidence is overwhelming and in each case permits only one reasonable inference. 
      I have found that the investment opportunities presented by Mr. Ellis were a house of cards built on a foundation of deception.  None of the investment opportunities were real and all were designed to simply extract substantial amounts of money from the complainants for the sole benefit of Mr. Ellis.  
      I find Mr. Ellis guilty on the following counts:
