./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/qc/cq/2023qccq15.html
     
Xiomara Martinez was found guilty of conspiracy to traffic in heroin between January 1, 2018 and June 30, 2018, contrary to section 465 (1) c) of the Criminal Code (Cr. C.).[1]
     
As explained in the decision on conviction, Ms. Martinez was a participant in a conspiracy to traffic heroin with a criminal organization involving 10 individuals. The organization, led by Dany Durand, was well structured with each of its members having specific roles and responsibilities.  The organization paid $5,750 for each package of 50 g of heroin and replenished its stock approximately every 5 days. One member separated the packages of 50 g of heroin into smaller bags for sale on the street. Several managers coordinated pickups of the heroin and were responsible for supervising the runners (or couriers), who in turn would supply the drugs to the street sellers and collect the profits. Each street seller was given a specific pre-established work shift and would report to a supervisor. 
     
Although the exact role played by Ms. Martinez in this organization was not established, the evidence did prove that she was a participant and met with co‑conspirators in furtherance of the conspiracy on four occasions, between May 1, 2019 and June 25, 2019.
     
The Crown recommends a sentence of 5 years, underscoring the dangers of heroin and referring to the sentences imposed on seven co-accused which range from 3 years to 8 years and 3 months, reflecting the involvement and profile of each.Ms. Martinez emphasizes her limited involvement in the conspiracy as well as several attenuating factors. She suggests a sentence of 12 months. GUIDING PRINCIPLES
     
Section 718 Cr. C. provides that the fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society and to contribute to the respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society. This purpose is met by the imposition of sanctions intended to meet one or more of the following objectives: a) to denounce unlawful conduct; b) to deter the offender and others from committing offences; c) to separate offenders from society when necessary; d) to assist in rehabilitating offenders; e) to provide reparation for harm done to victims or to the community; f) to promote a sense of responsibility in offenders and acknowledgment of the harm done to victims and to the community.
     
A sentence should be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences (sec.718.2 (b)). 
     
An offender should not be deprived of liberty if less restrictive sanctions may be appropriate in the circumstances (sec. 718.2 (d) and (e)). 
     
The Court must consider the mitigating and aggravating circumstances (sec. 718.2 (a)) in striving to determine a just sentence which must fundamentally be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender (sec 718.1). PROFILE OF MS. MARTINEZ / AGGRAVATING AND MITIGATING CIRCUMSTANCES: 
     
Ms. Martinez is 46 years old. She was born in El Salvador, where she grew up until her family moved to Canada when she was 14 years old. She is now a dual citizen of both countries. She is the co-owner and manager of a family business which operates an employment agency in the food industry. She also owns a garage that manages the maintenance of the vehicles used by the agency. She has no criminal record.
   Ms. Martinez maintains her innocence and chose not to testify at her trial as is her constitutional right. Because of her silence with respect to her participation in this conspiracy, the presentence report does not shed any light on the factors that may have led her to become involved with this criminal organization.[3]
   There is no evidence of Ms. Martinez being addicted to drugs or a drug user at all. The only inference that can be drawn, given the nature of this conspiracy, is that she participated in it for financial gain. There is no evidence here of any awareness nor of any introspection on her part about the consequences of her crime that might serve to lower the risk of reoffending. It should be noted, however, that the absence of mitigating factors − although useful in comparing her situation to that of other offenders − is not to be considered as an aggravating factor.
   The principal mitigating factor in this matter is the fact that until now, Ms. Martinez has been a productive member of society. She is self- employed and has no prior criminal record. The aggravating factor is the nature of the drugs involved in this conspiracy. The jurisprudence is replete with reminders about the devastating consequences of heroin use, and its pernicious and addictive nature. APPROPRIATE RANGE OF SENTENCES / PARITY OF SENTENCES
   In order to ensure that the sentence imposed is just and appropriate, the Court must consider sentences imposed in similar matters. Of course, each case is to be individualized and must take into account the particular circumstances of the offender. Distinctions must also be drawn between the circumstances of Ms. Martinez and those of her co-accused who have received their sentences. In addition, the Court stresses that the sentence to be imposed here is for one count of conspiracy only. Although the maximum sentence for conspiracy to traffic heroin is the same as the maximum sentence for trafficking (the maximum penalty is life imprisonment in both cases), in reviewing sentences imposed in similar matters, the Court will consider that Ms. Matinez has not been found guilty of trafficking. As the Supreme Court of Canada has stated, evidence that an offender committed the substantive offence will generally lead to a harsher sentence than if he or she had conspired to commit it but had not actually done so.[4]
   The sentence here must reflect the fact that Ms. Martinez participated in a conspiracy to traffic in heroin, one of the most dangerous drugs sold on the street. The acute dangers and high cost to society associated with the trafficking of hard drugs was most recently underscored by the Supreme Court of Canada in R v. Parranto:
      The dangers posed by trafficking in hard drugs, such as heroin and cocaine, have long been recognized in Canada. Over the past few decades, however, society’s awareness of the true gravity of trafficking in such drugs has grown to the point that we are reminded, on a daily basis, of the death, destruction, and havoc it causes in communities across Canada.
      Trafficking in such substances causes both direct and indirect harms to society. Directly, the distribution and abuse of hard drugs leads to addiction, debilitating adverse health effects, and, all too frequently, death by overdose. […]
      Trafficking also leads indirectly to a host of other ills, including an increase in all manner of crime, committed by those seeking to finance their addiction, as well as by organized crime syndicates […] Given that much of this criminal activity is violent, trafficking has come to be understood as an offence of violence, even beyond the ruinous consequences it has for those who abuse drugs and in the process, destroy themselves and others. Indeed, as Doherty J.A. has explained, violence is such a predictable consequence of the illicit drug trade that it cannot be dissociated from it: Cocaine sale and use is closely and strongly associated with violent crime. Cocaine importation begets a multiplicity of violent acts. Viewed in isolation from the conduct which inevitably follows the importation of cocaine, the act itself is not a violent one in the strict sense. It cannot, however, be disassociated from its inevitable consequences. 
(R. v. Hamilton (2004), 2004 CanLII 5549 (ON CA), 72 O.R. (3d) 1 (C.A), at para. 104) […]
      A further and perhaps even more devastating consequence of the hard drug trade is its impact on families and the intergenerational trauma it causes: Trafficking in drugs, and in particular hard drugs such as cocaine, is a crime whose victims can be found far beyond the individuals who become addicted to the drugs. Families can be torn apart by either the loss of the individual to the addiction itself or to the violence that all too often accompanies the drug trade. Children suffer immense harm from the effects of addiction in their home, whether this addiction be from pre‑natal impact or from physical and/or emotional violence in the homes that they should be safe in. The future of these children and their families is damaged and all of society pays the price. (R. v. Profeit, 2009 YKTC 39, at paras. 25‑26 (CanLII).
      Finally, the trafficking of hard drugs leads to “significant if not staggering” costs to society in terms of health care and law enforcement expenses, as well as lost productivity […] 
[references omitted]
   Recently, in imposing sentence in the case of R. v. Salem,Mascia J. canvassed the range of sentences for offenses involving heroin, as well as the rationale for imposing harsh sentences, which stems primarily from the goal of deterrence in these matters.
   The review of the caselaw in Salemestablishes that “absent exceptional circumstances, even first offenders trafficking in small quantities will be handed jail sentences − usually in a penitentiary”.Deterrence is the overriding sentencing principle in these cases, even for the addict who sells heroin to feed his habit.In Salem, exceptional circumstancesjustified a lenient sentence of  two years less a day (less 50 days counted as pretrial custody)which was well below the usual range.
   In R. v. DiBenedetto,the Ontario Court of Appeal confirmed a range of sentence of 6 to 12 years for offences involving trafficking of between 0.5 and 1 kg. of heroin. 
   As to the parity of sentences with those imposed on the co‑accused in this file, based on the evidence at trial, Ms. Martinez’ role was lesser than any of the co‑accused already sentenced. As mentioned above, on four occasions Ms. Martinez met with a co‑conspirator in furtherance of their common goal.
   The leader of the conspiracy and those that were heavily involved in the group’s activities received sentences of between five and eight years, following their early guilty pleas.There is no suggestion that their involvement is in any way commensurate with that of Ms. Martinez.
   Lesser sentences were imposed on two co-conspirators. Simon Leclerc, 30 years old, pleaded guilty and acknowledged that he was involved in the conspiracy from October 2017 to June 2018. His involvement began as a courier.  He delivered money to Durand, the leader of the group, and retrieved packages of 50 g of heroin on at least two occasions. His role became that of a packer, in charge of separating 50 g of heroin into smaller bags for which he received $500 a week. In addition to the counts of conspiracy to traffic in heroin and trafficking in heroin, he also pleaded guilty to breach of conditions for having broken his curfew, contrary to the conditions of his release. Taking into account a positive presentence report, the absence of any prior convictions, the full support of his law-abiding family, his remorse, his efforts to address both his personal difficulties and his drug dependence through therapy, and considering a low risk of reoffending, the sentence imposed was three and a half years.
   François Jarry, 36 years old, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to traffic in heroin and trafficking in heroin from October 2017 to May 2018. He acted as a courier for the organization, picking up both money and drugs. The evidence established that he transported 50 g of heroin on four different occasions, receiving $500 each time, and was not deterred in his activities as a courier even after he was arrested with heroin in his possession during the course of this investigation. He had a criminal record consisting of four counts of failure to respect court conditions or conditions of a probation order between 2011 and 2014. The presentence report noted that his arrest in this matter led to positive changes in his life, namely moving away from his network of criminal acquaintances, and total abstinence from drugs and alcohol. Those efforts were seen as lessening the risk of recidivism, nevertheless the risk was deemed to be present in the medium and long-term. He received a sentence of three years.
   In both of those cases (Leclerc and Jarry), despite the seriousness of the offenses and the significant involvement of each accused in the conspiracy, the sentence reflected their positive steps taken towards rehabilitation. CONCUSION
   In view of all the factors set out above and taking into account the range of sentences, the Court finds no justification for imposing a sentence significantly higher on Ms. Martinez than those imposed for Leclerc and Jarry. It is true that their sentences reflected mitigating factors which are absent here (guilty pleas, rehabilitation), however, the sentence to be imposed here is for one count of conspiracy, whereas Leclerc and Jarry were also guilty of trafficking heroin. Furthermore, the evidence established that their involvement in the conspiracy was considerably greater than that of Ms. Martinez.
   Even taking account of the lesser involvement of Ms Martinez, there is no doubt that the 12-month sentence she proposes is markedly and inexplicably below the appropriate range for this type of offenseand does not reflect the devastation caused by heroin. As mentioned above, the Court has no evidence of any mitigating circumstances apart from the absence of any prior record.
   The Tribunal will sentence Ms. Martinez to a period of imprisonment of 30 months; a sentence meant to deter others from similar conduct, and to express society’s condemnation of this type of activity, while considering the particular circumstances of this offender.
