./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/sk/pc/2023skpc2.html
             
The accused individuals were charged jointly as follows:
 
Between the 21st day of October 2021 and the 15th day of December 2021 at or near Fort Qu’Appelle in the province of Saskatchewan did: (1)              
Being persons responsible for animals, to wit: dogs, caused or permitted the animals to be or to continue to be in distress, contrary to Section 4(2) of the Animal Protection Act 2018; and
 
 
(2)              
Fail to comply with a corrective action order imposed on October 22nd, 2021, by an Animal Protection Officer, contrary to Section 23(1)(a) of the Animal Protection Act 2018, c A-21.2.
 
             
At the conclusion of the trial the Crown conceded that there was no evidence led with respect to a Corrective Action Order being issued on October 22, 2021. I agreed. Accordingly, I find each individual not guilty with respect to count 2.
 
             
The only issue, therefore, is whether any of the dogs, under the control of the accused individuals, were in “distress,” as that term is defined in The Animal Protection Act, 2018, SS 2018, c A-21.2 [the Act], at the relevant time. 
 
             
The Crown called three witnesses, all of which were Animal Protection Officers. The Defence called only one witness, the Defendant, Morgan Desjarlais.
 
             
At the outset of the trial, the Defence conceded that the identity of the accused individuals and the jurisdiction of the Court were not in dispute.
 
 
II         BURDEN OF PROOF
 
             
The burden of proof on the Crown relating to this non-Criminal Code matter continues to be proof beyond a reasonable doubt as qualified in the case of R v LaPlante, 2021 SKPC 52, at para 3 which stated:
 
       The remaining charge is a non-criminal regulatory offence of causing animal distress. As this is a strict liability offence, there is no necessity for the prosecution to prove the existence of mens rea (mental intent). The Crown is required to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused committed the actus reus (prohibited act), leaving it open to the accused to avoid liability by proving on a balance of probabilities that they took all reasonable care: R v Sault Ste. Marie (City), 1978 CanLII 11 (SCC), 2 SCR 1299.  
 
 
 
III        THE LAW
 
             
The relevant provisions of the Act are as follows: 4(1)   No person shall cause an animal to be in distress. (2)   No person responsible for an animal shall cause or permit the animal to be or to continue to be in distress. (3)   This section does not apply if the distress results from an activity carried on in accordance with the regulations or in accordance with reasonable and generally accepted practices of animal care, management, husbandry, hunting, fishing, trapping, pest control or slaughter.
 
             
Section 2(2) of the Act defines the different scenarios that would constitute putting an animal into distress. It states as follows:
 
(2)  An animal is in distress if it is: (a)              
deprived of: (i)     food or water sufficient to maintain the animal in a state of good health; (ii)  care or shelter; or (iii)                 
 veterinary care or medical attention; (b)                 
in need of reasonable protection from injurious heat or cold; (c)                 
wounded, ill, in pain, suffering, abused or neglected; (d)                 
kept in conditions that: (i)  are unsanitary; (ii)  will significantly impair the animal’s health or well-being over time; (iii)              
 cause the animal extreme anxiety or suffering; or (iv)  contravene the prescribed standards, codes of practice or guidelines; or (e)                 
abandoned by its owner or by a person responsible for the animal in a manner that causes, or is likely to cause, distress resulting from any or all of the factors listed in this section.
 
             
Notably section 2(4) of the Act defines who is responsible for an animal as follows:
 
2(4) For the purposes of Parts 2 and 4, a person responsible for an animal includes a person who: (a)                 
owns an animal; (b)                 
has custody or control of an animal; or (c)                 
has custody or charge of a minor who is the owner of an animal.
 
         
In this case the Crown alleged breaches, by both accused, of subsections 2(2)(a)(iii) (relating to a lack of veterinary care or medical attention) and subsection 2(2)(d)(i) and (ii) (relating to unsanitary conditions and conditions which would significantly impair the animal’s health or wellbeing over time). Any one of these conditions, being proven by the Crown beyond a reasonable doubt, is all that would be required for a conviction.
 
         
I will also say that with respect to subsection 2(4) of the Act, there is really no dispute; at all material times both accused owned and had custody and control of the dogs in question.
 
 
IV         THE EVIDENCE
 
A.    Crown Evidence
 
1.      Officer Carrier
 
         
The Crown’s first witness was Protection Officer Nicole Carrier. Officer Carrier had a wealth of experience being in this position for six years and having investigated between two and three hundred cases per year.
 
         
Ms. Carrier was the first to investigate this matter after receiving a complaint. In total she attended and inspected the residence of both accused on October 21, 2021, November 23, 2021, and December 15, 2021.
 
         
Both accused lived together in the same house in Fort Qu’Appelle where the dogs were found (the Residence). 
 
 
October 21, 2021 - Inspection of the Residence
 
         
On October 21, 2021 Officer Carrier first attended the Residence following an initial complaint of concerns for the welfare of dogs at the Residence.  At this time she observed approximately 40 dogs inside the Residence. She testified that the dogs seemed to have good body scores but that some of the dogs had medical concerns.
 
         
Officer Carrier then described the Residence in which the dogs were housed, and the accused individuals lived. She described the Residence as follows:
 
-         
unsanitary living conditions; -         
feces and urine all over the flooring; -         
house itself very cluttered; -         
garbage piled in all of the rooms; -         
a strong smell of ammonia that she attributed to the presence of feces and urine on the floors and to some extent the walls; -         
she confirmed that food and water for the dogs was present.
 
         
Officer Carrier took a number of photographs during her visit on October 21, 2021, which most certainly supported her testimony. The photographs from this visit were contained under Tab #1 of Crown’s Exhibit P-1.
 
         
The photographs certainly supported the testimony of Officer Carrier. The floors and walls are filthy and appear to be covered and stained, as Officer Carrier described, with fecal matter and urine. Considering that approximately 40 dogs were housed at the Residence, this was not surprising.
 
         
The photographs further confirmed that this was not a large house and that it was filled with clutter to such an extent that there were basically only walking paths available from one room to the next and within each room very little space to move around.
 
         
The photographs also showed stacks of dog kennels in one room in the Residence which appeared to house numerous dogs.
 
         
Officer Carrier also testified that she witnessed dogs urinating and defecating on the floor while she was inside the Residence. She confirmed that there was no ventilation in the Residence to deal with the smell.
 
         
Following Officer Carrier’s visit, she issued a “Notice” which became Defence Exhibit D-1. The Notice was issued to both Defendants and outlined the concerns for animal health and the need for veterinarian’s care for some of the dogs within the next two weeks.
 
         
The Notice also described that several of the dogs had fecal staining on their paws and coats and have “fecal balls” attached to them.
 
         
In her Notice, she described the Residence as “unsanitary/filthy living conditions” – “feces and urine coating the visible floor space” – “smells of ammonia”. 
 
         
The Notice required action be taken by the Defendants which included:
 
(1)   Dogs listed must be vet assessed and treated within 2 weeks. Provide report to APSS (Animal Protection Services of Saskatchewan); (2)   Must provide adequate and sanitary living conditions. Improvement must be made to spacing, air quality and sanitation/cleanliness of living environment; (3)   Provide insulated and heated shelter to dogs outside; 
(4)   Reduce population to a manageable number and spay/neuter; (5)   Follow kennel code practice.
 
         
A copy of the Kennel Code of Practice was provided to the Defendants by Officer Carrier.
 
 
November 23, 2021 – Inspection of the Residence
 
         
Officer Carrier next attended to the Residence on November 23, 2021, but this time with a Search Warrant in hand and supported by other Animal Protection Officers, the RCMP and a veterinarian. Both accused persons were again present on this day.
 
         
On this occasion Officer Carrier was able to count the dogs in the Residence which totaled 48.  All of the dogs were now assessed by a veterinarian. The dogs were found to have good body scores of between 2.5 and 4 out of 5. However, 16 dogs were found to have health concerns as well as numerous grooming concerns such as matted coats, over-grown nails and significant dental issues (diseased and missing teeth). Many dogs had fecal and urine staining on their paws, tails and bellies. Officer Carrier believed that the condition of the dogs in the Residence had not changed from her first visit in October 2021.
 
         
Certainly, the Residence was in no better condition with what Officer Carrier described as fecal matter and urine stains on the floors and walls and very poor air quality. On this occasion the air quality was measured. Ammonia was found to be present at 10 parts per million on both the main floor and basement.
 
         
Officer Carrier testified that an extreme level of ammonia would be at 20 parts per million but that no ammonia should be detected for it to be a healthy living environment. 
 
         
With respect to acceptable ammonia levels, in the case previously cited of R v LaPlante (supra), which involved a house that contained over 100 cats. Ammonia testing was also done in that case and an expert called who testified as follows with respect to ammonia levels:
