./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/mb/kb/2023mbkb12.html
       
The accused was charged with sexual assault and sexual interference.  On November 3, 2019, the date of the incident, the complainant was 14 and the accused was 20.  They had never met before the incident.  They both testified. 
       
The complainant admitted to being “extremely” intoxicated and described her condition as being in a “coma”.  The complainant testified that the accused performed oral sex and vaginal sex upon her without consent.  Her eyes were closed during the oral sex.  The accused denied doing anything of a sexual nature with her.  For reasons explained below, I find the accused not guilty. FACTS
       
The trial took place on December 5-6, 2022, in a “child-friendly” courtroom.
       
Jurisdiction and date of the offences were admitted.  It was admitted that the accused was the person named in the Indictment.
       
Counsel agreed that the complainant was born in February 2005, and the accused was born in June 1999.
       
The complainant testified that she did not know the accused before November 3, 2019.
       
The complainant made a video statement to the police on          December 3, 2019.  She adopted the comments that she made in the statement, and the video was entered as an exhibit.
       
On November 3, 2019, the complainant and her friend (the “Friend”) obtained two bottles of Long Island Vodka and began drinking them.  They walked to a McDonalds and spent some time inside. 
       
While in the McDonalds, the complainant encountered the accused. 
He began to “hit on” her.  The Friend was present.  In her police statement, the complainant said:  “He was like hitting on us – well, like hitting on me.  He was like calling me hot as I was walking past him.  And then when I got to the table with my friends he like followed us around…”
    
In her statement, the complainant went on: “So me and my friends went outside and shared a smoke with him.  He was like touching my waist and stuff, and I was like, ‘I’m 14.’  Like, ‘Stop.’  And he would like – kept like --- he’d come up behind me and like grab me and like hold me close to him.  I’m like, ‘Stop.’  And my friends would be like, ‘Stop.  She’s 14.’”
    
Later, the complainant left McDonalds with the Friend and went to the house where the alleged offences occurred (the “House”).  Other friends and friends of friends were there, at least at first.  At the trial, the complainant said that two of these people (whose names she did not know) were males.  She did not remember much about their appearance. 
    
The complainant entered the basement of the House and lay down on a mattress.  Referring to the accused, the complainant said: “I remember him like coming on top of me and like trying to kiss me and like, you know, like hold me and he was like holding me and stuff.”
    
The complainant continued: “And then that’s when I just passed out and I was like unconscious, but like I could still hear everything that was going on.  It’s just I couldn’t open my eyes or like move.”
    
The complainant fell asleep and then woke up.  She said: “And [the accused] was on top of me and then he was like – my pants were off and he was like on top of me having sex with me.  And I was like – then like awake, he – he got off of me when I woke up.”
    
Later, the complainant explained how her pants were on when she passed out but, when she woke up, “My pants were off and they were beside the bed and so was my underwear too.  They were with my pants.”
    
The complainant did not recall seeing a condom.
    
After the incident, the complainant did not go to a hospital.  She did take certain “self-care” medications, to prevent HIV and pregnancy.
    
At trial, the complainant added some details that she did not give to police.  She testified that the accused performed oral sex upon her.  Her eyes were closed at the time, but she testified that it was the accused.
    
At trial, the complainant described her state at the time of the incident. She described herself as “extremely” drunk.  She said she felt like she was in a “coma”.  She said she vomited.  She said she was too drunk to stand.
    
The complainant has not seen the accused since the incident, other than in court. The disputed evidence
    
After the complainant testified, the Crown raised a specific issue.  At that point, a voir dire was held.  The Crown said that, when she was with the police, the complainant identified the accused’s photo from a police photo-pack.  The Crown said that it would like to call a police officer to testify to that effect.  Counsel agreed that defence was previously made aware of these events, so there was no disclosure problem.  However, defence counsel objected to the Crown’s proposal.
    
Defence counsel argued that the Crown’s proposed evidence would be irrelevant.  Furthermore, it would probably be hearsay - an officer would testify about things the complainant said in order to establish the truth of those things.  Finally, it would amount to improper oath-helping.
    
Defence counsel candidly explained that, in closing argument, he would argue that the complainant was not a reliable witness.  The issue would be reliability, not credibility.
    
The Crown filed a copy of R. v. Santhosh, 2016 ONCA 731 (“Santhosh”).  At paragraphs 33-37, the court explained the rule against oath-helping.  At paragraph 33, the court quoted with approval from the Supreme Court of Canada’s decision in R. v. B. (F.F.), 1993 CanLII 167 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 697, at p. 729: The rule against oath-helping prohibits a party from presenting evidence solely for the purpose of bolstering a witness’ credibility before that witness’ credibility is attacked. This type of evidence is of the sort that would tend to prove the truthfulness of the witness, rather than the truth of the witness’ statements.
 
    
In Santhosh at paragraph 37, the court observed that, “a party can introduce oath-helping evidence to bolster the credibility of a witness whose credibility has been attacked.”  The Crown sought to rely upon this principle to support its proposal.
    
I sustained defence counsel’s objection.  The voir dire ended and the trial continued.  Among other things, I concluded that the testimony of officers about what the complainant said to them while viewing the photo-pack would be hearsay.
    
Now, with the luxury of time, I can more fully explain the principles underlying my decision.
    
To begin with, any evidence that the complainant chose the accused’s photo from a photo-pack would be irrelevant.  After the complainant spoke to the police, the accused was obviously arrested and charged.  The complainant testified under oath at trial that it was the accused (who was personally present in the courtroom) who sexually assaulted her.  The apparent fact that, three years earlier, while not under oath, she also identified the accused’s photo from a photo-pack would add nothing to the evidence.
    
The Crown did not question the complainant about the photo-pack. 
Any testimony from a police officer about what the complainant said or did while viewing the photo-pack would not be the best evidence.
    
Furthermore, although counsel did not discuss the principle of “prior consistent statements”, that is essentially what the Crown was driving at.  At trial, the complainant said that the accused sexually assaulted her.  Apparently, about three years before the trial, the complainant essentially said the same thing to a police officer with a photo-pack.  The complainant made a “prior consistent statement”.  In R. v. Stirling, 2008 SCC 10, at paragraph 5, the Supreme Court of Canada pointed out that it “is well established that prior consistent statements are generally inadmissible.”  The Manitoba Court of Appeal reiterated this point in R. v. Kemash, 2009 MBCA 15 at paragraph 35.
    
Finally, as I observe in paragraph 61 below, once the trial was over, it became clear that the dispute about the photo-pack was essentially academic. The accused
    
The accused testified.  He denied doing or trying to do anything of a sexual nature with the complainant.
    
He agreed that he never met the complainant before the date in question and that he has never seen her since.
    
He agreed that he went to the McDonalds on the evening in question.  He said he had consumed a little alcohol and a little marijuana.  He agreed that he later walked to the House.  He agreed that the complainant and a few other people, including a number of males, were also present. 
    
The accused explained that the House belonged to a female friend of his mother’s (“R”).  He was staying there at the time.  He stayed there for a few months.  The sister of the accused (the “Sister”) was present on the evening in question.
    
When the complainant, the Sister and their friends or friends of friends arrived at the House, the accused was waiting to be picked up by his friend, who had a vehicle.  He knew that R did not want people in her house. Therefore, the accused told the Sister to make sure that her friends left.
    
If the complainant vomited that evening, it was not in the presence of the accused.
    
The accused’s friend picked him up and they left.  The accused did not return until early the next morning.  By then, everyone was gone.
    
The accused remembered attending a police station and speaking with the police.  If the accused made a recorded statement to the police, the Crown did not use it to impeach him. CRIMINAL CODE (the “Code”) AND CASE LAW
    
R. v. W.(D.), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), (“W.(D.)”) was a sexual assault trial in which the accused testified.  The court outlined a useful approach for analyzing the credibility of an accused and the principle of reasonable doubt.  At page 758, the majority set out the framework for instructing a jury: First, if you believe the evidence of the accused, obviously you must acquit.
 
Second, if you do not believe the testimony of the accused but you are left in reasonable doubt by it, you must acquit.
 
Third, even if you are not left in doubt by the evidence of the accused, you must ask yourself whether, on the basis of the evidence which you do accept, you are convinced beyond a reasonable doubt by that evidence of the guilt of the accused.
 
    
Later cases have elaborated upon W.(D.).  R. v. Menow, 2013 MBCA 72, was also a sexual assault case involving a W.(D.) analysis.   At the appeal stage, the accused argued that the trial judge had erred by considering the evidence of the complainant and of a witness in concluding that the accused was not credible.  At paragraph 23, the appeal court observed: 
To assess the evidence of the accused in a vacuum ignores the fact that the whole purpose of the trial is to determine whether or not the accused is guilty…It is impossible for an accused’s evidence to be considered without a factual or contextual backdrop for the charge itself. 
 
    
In R. v. Vuradin, 2013 2 SCC 38, the court considered the W.(D.) framework.  At paragraph 21, the court pointed out: 
The order in which a trial judge makes credibility findings of witnesses is inconsequential as long as the principle of reasonable doubt remains the central consideration.
 
    
Relevant provisions of the Criminal Code, RSC 1985, c. C-46 (the “Code”)  include: Mistake of age
 
150.1 (4) It is not a defence to a charge under section 151 or 152, subsection 160(3) or 173(2), or section 271, 272 or 273 that the accused believed that the complainant was 16 years of age or more at the time the offence is alleged to have been committed unless the accused took all reasonable steps to ascertain the age of the complainant.
 
Sexual interference
 
151 Every person who, for a sexual purpose, touches, directly or indirectly, with a part of the body or with an object, any part of the body of a person under the age of 16 years
 
(a) is guilty of an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than 14 years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of one year; or 
 
(b) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction and is liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than two years less a day and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of 90 days.
 
Assault
 
265 (1) A person commits an assault when
 
(a) without the consent of another person, he applies force intentionally to that other person, directly or indirectly;
 
(b) he attempts or threatens, by an act or a gesture, to apply force to another person, if he has, or causes that other person to believe on reasonable grounds that he has, present ability to effect his purpose; or
 
(c) while openly wearing or carrying a weapon or an imitation thereof, he accosts or impedes another person or begs.
 
Application
 
(2) This section applies to all forms of assault, including sexual assault, sexual assault with a weapon, threats to a third party or causing bodily harm and aggravated sexual assault.
 
ARGUMENT
    
Both counsel referred to W.(D.).
    
Defence counsel agreed that, if the complainant’s version of events was accurate, sexual assault and sexual interference occurred.
    
Defence counsel argued that the accused was both credible and reliable and that his evidence raised a reasonable doubt about his guilt.  Defence counsel argued that a crucial issue was the reliability of the complainant.  She was so drunk that her evidence was unreliable.  She testified that two other males were present at about the time of the incident in question.  Given the coma-like state of the complainant, it is possible that one of the two males sexually assaulted her. 
    
Defence counsel also pointed out that, during the alleged oral sex, the complainant’s eyes were closed.  If the oral sex occurred, there must be some reasonable doubt that the accused was the party involved.  
    
The complainant did testify that she opened her eyes and saw the accused on top of her, having sex with her.  However, again, the extreme intoxication of the complainant raises a reasonable doubt.
    
The Crown argued that the accused was not credible, and that none of the evidence raised a reasonable doubt about his guilt. FINDINGS
    
There was no dispute about the age of the complainant.  There is no doubt that, if her version of events was completely accurate, sexual assault and sexual interference occurred.      
    
Counsel agreed that W.(D.) and the W.(D.) line of cases applied.  Looking at the first leg of W.(D.), I am not certain whether or not I believed the accused.  My uncertainty in itself suggests at least some reasonable doubt, and the need for acquittal.
    
In the event that I have erred, I will look at the second leg of W.(D.). 
The evidence of the accused did raise a reasonable doubt about his guilt.  The accused was not evasive.  Although I am aware of the limits of considering witness demeanour, his demeanour, body language and tone of voice did not suggest any sort of deceit.  Although he was not an eloquent speaker, his testimony was internally consistent.  
    
In the event that I have erred, the evidence as a whole raised a reasonable doubt about the guilt of the accused. 
    
To begin with, the complainant told the police that the accused touched her waist and grabbed her from behind and held her close, in front of witnesses at McDonalds.  The Crown called no witnesses to testify.  The accused denied these allegations.
    
The complainant admitted that she was “extremely” intoxicated when the alleged events happened.  She went so far as to describe her condition as being like a “coma”.  She admitted that two unnamed boys were present at roughly the time that the alleged sexual assault occurred.  Those facts in themselves have to raise at least a reasonable doubt about the guilt of the accused. 
    
Defence counsel argued that the main issue is not the complainant’s honesty, but her reliability.  Indeed, defence counsel conceded that a sexual assault likely happened on the day in question.  However, two males other than the accused were present.  
    
  In other words, it is not necessary to conclude that the complainant deliberately concocted a story about the accused sexually assaulting her.  It is enough to conclude that the complainant was so drunk that she cannot reliably say that it was the accused (as opposed to one of the other males) who sexually assaulted her.  If the court can reach that conclusion, there must be a reasonable doubt, and acquittal is required.
    
I agree with defence counsel.  The complainant was so drunk that her testimony about the crucial facts was not reliable.  If she was sexually assaulted, there is a reasonable doubt that it was the accused who assaulted her.  Therefore, I must acquit the accused on both charges.
    
I am aware that the accused admitted that he had consumed a little alcohol and a little marijuana on the evening in question.  However, that admission is far removed from being extremely drunk or being in a coma-like state.
    
The accused was unshaken on the crucial issue.  He denied doing or trying to do anything of a sexual nature with the complainant.  The fact that he consumed small amounts of alcohol and marijuana did not make him any less credible or reliable on this crucial issue.
    
Incidentally, even if counsel had agreed as an agreed fact that the complainant picked out the accused’s photo from a police photo-pack, my final conclusions would likely have been the same.  At some point before the trial, the accused was obviously arrested and charged.  The essential problem for the Crown’s case would have been exactly the same – the complainant was so drunk that her extreme intoxication created a reasonable doubt about the accused’s guilt.  In a sense, the issue of the photo-pack was academic.
    
For all of these reasons, I find the accused not guilty on all charges.
    
I thank counsel for their courtesy and cooperation.
