./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/mb/kb/2023mbkb1.html
       
A.K.B. was convicted by a jury of second degree murder in the killing of his mother, L.D.  He was five-and-a-half weeks shy of his seventeenth birthday at the time of the offence.
       
L.D. was beaten to death in her bed with a weapon, such as a baseball bat or crowbar.
       
The Crown makes an application pursuant to section 64 of the Youth Criminal Justice Act ("YCJA") for an order seeking an adult sentence, as the maximum sentence available under the YCJA is not sufficient.  For the Crown to succeed in its application to have an adult sentence imposed, (a) it must rebut the presumption of A.K.B.'s diminished moral blameworthiness, and if the Crown is successful in doing so, (b) it must satisfy me that the sanctions that can be imposed under the YCJA are inadequate to hold A.K.B. accountable for the murder.  See R. v. D.B., 2008 SCC 25, 2 S.C.R. 3 at paras. 92–93.
       
The defence says A.K.B. should be sentenced as a youth.  A.K.B. was sixteen years old at the time of the offence, has no prior criminal record, has no history of violence, and was by all accounts a normal teenager who was dependent on his parents.  The defence says the Crown has not rebutted the presumption of diminished moral blameworthiness.  If I am satisfied the Crown has rebutted the presumption, the defence says a sentence under the YCJA is sufficient. II.     FACTS
       
A.K.B. was convicted by a jury of second degree murder.  As such, I must determine the facts upon which A.K.B. is to be sentenced.
       
Section 724(2) of the Criminal Code provides: Jury (2)    Where the court is composed of a judge and jury, the court
        (a)   shall accept as proven all facts, express or implied, that are essential to the jury's verdict of guilty; and
          (b)  may find any other relevant fact that was disclosed by evidence at the trial to be proven, or hear evidence presented by either party with respect to that fact.
       
In determining the facts upon which A.K.B. is to be sentenced, I am bound by the express and implied factual implications of the jury's verdict and I must not accept as fact any evidence consistent only with a verdict rejected by the jury.  See R. v. Brown, 1991 CanLII 73 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 518 at 523; R. v. Braun, 1995 CanLII 16075 (MB CA), M.J. No. 723 (QL) at para. 30 (C.A.).
       
In my view, the conviction of second degree murder was based on the jury's conclusion that, although A.K.B. formed the intention to kill his mother, they were not satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt he had planned and deliberated over the killing.
       
Given that A.K.B. and L.D. were the only people in the house prior to the murder, there is no direct evidence of what occurred prior to the killing.
     Sometime before 9 a.m. on March 26, 2019, A.K.B. beat his mother to death with a weapon, such as a baseball bat or crowbar.  He struck her several times.  There were thousands of blood spatter stains throughout L.D.'s bedroom—including on all four walls and the ceiling—as well as on the wall just outside her bedroom.
     The autopsy showed the injuries to L.D.'s head and face were significant:  bruises, tears, lacerations down to the bone, and visible brain matter.  There were also injuries to L.D.'s right arm:  bruises to the forearm and wrist and a compound fracture to the right wrist that would have been caused by a significant blow. 
The pathologist testified that those injuries would have occurred as L.D. put her arms up to protect her head.  In other words, they were defensive injuries.
     I cannot conclude with certainty that L.D. was asleep when the attack occurred.  However, the murder occurred in the early morning, L.D. was found lying on the bed facing up, with her head at the top of the bed where the pillows are placed, she was wearing clothing one would sleep in, and she had very few defensive wounds.  The blood spatter expert provided the opinion that, based on the bloodstain pattern in the room, L.D. did not leave the bed or that position during the attack.
     After the killing, A.K.B. made efforts to clean up the scene.  With the blood spatter stains located throughout the bedroom, there can be no doubt A.K.B. would have had blood on him.  Clearly A.K.B. cleaned himself up before leaving the house that morning.
     A.K.B. also poured bleach on L.D.  There were significant bleach stains where L.D. was found lying on the bed, including in the area of her head.
     A.K.B. went out to the driveway just after 9 a.m. and changed the cabin air filter in the car.  He then took the family dog by car to the dog day care centre.  He continued to the St. Vital Centre shopping mall, and then Walmart and Canadian Tire at the Southdale Shopping Centre.  From video surveillance at those locations, A.K.B. looked calm and normal while running errands.
     Between 9:01 and 9:20 a.m., A.K.B. sent three text messages to his mother's cell phone about running some errands.
     A.K.B. returned home at approximately 10:36 a.m. and called 9-1-1 at 10:43 a.m.  In that call he said his mother was on the bed and there was blood all over her.  He said she was sleeping when he left to take the dog to the dog day care centre. 
When asked if his mother had been having any problems with anyone, A.K.B. replied, "There's a guy at work that was bothering her and she transferred away because -- I don't know."
     Police officers arrived on scene and found A.K.B. just inside the front door.  A.K.B. was crying and holding a cell phone.  He pointed the officers towards the bedroom.
     The officers found L.D. lying face up in bed, unconscious and not breathing.  All five officers testified that her face was badly beaten to the point of being unrecognizable.
     Firefighters and paramedics arrived shortly after the police.
     The house was very thoroughly searched over the course of the next nine days and no weapon was located in the house.  A.K.B. could have put the weapon in the garbage bin at the house (which was picked up that morning) or could have disposed of it somewhere along the way of his errands.  We will never know where he disposed of it.
     In his statement to the police, A.K.B. recounted his errands of that morning—taking the dog to the dog day care centre and shopping.  He told the officers a story that when he left the house, he thought his mother was still sleeping, and when he got home, the door was unlocked.  He then noticed blood on her bedroom door and found her body.  When asked if his mother had trouble with anyone, he again brought up the possibility of another suspect from her work (C.L.). III.    THE LAW
 
    
The youth criminal justice system is intended to protect the public by holding young persons accountable by imposing sentences that are proportionate to the seriousness of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the young person, and by promoting the rehabilitation and reintegration of young persons who have committed offences.
    
For an adult sentence to be imposed on A.K.B., first the Crown must rebut the presumption of diminished moral blameworthiness ("the presumption").  The standard is neither proof beyond a reasonable doubt nor proof on a balance of probabilities. 
Rather, the standard is one of satisfaction after I carefully consider all the relevant factors.  See R. v. A.O., 2007 ONCA 144 (CanLII).
    
Only if I am satisfied the Crown has rebutted the presumption do I go on to consider whether the Crown has demonstrated a youth sentence would not be sufficient to hold A.K.B. accountable for the crime.
          The Presumption of Diminished Moral Blameworthiness
    
In assessing whether the Crown has rebutted the presumption, I must consider both the circumstances of the offence and A.K.B.'s circumstances.  "The presumption assumes that all young people start from a position of lesser maturity, moral sophistication and capacity for independent judgment than adults":  R. v. M.W., 2017 ONCA 22 (CanLII) at para. 97.
    
I must be careful not to impose an onus on A.K.B.  There is no onus upon him to establish he had the moral capacity of a youth.  The presumption already exists.
    
The Crown and the defence provided several cases supporting their respective positions.  There are similarities and distinguishing features in any case, but every case must be decided on its own facts and circumstances.
    
I must be cautious in considering cases prior to the Supreme Court of Canada's decision in D.B. in 2008.  In that case, the Supreme Court of Canada upheld the Ontario Court of Appeal's decision (2006 CanLII 8871 (ON CA), O.J. No. 1112 (QL)) that a presumption of an adult sentence for certain offences was inconsistent with the principle of fundamental justice that young persons are entitled to the presumption of diminished moral culpability.  The Supreme Court of Canada also set out the two-pronged test I must follow.
    
Subsequently in 2017, the Ontario Court of Appeal, in M.W., noted that a two‑pronged approach is important: … [U]ndertaking separate analyses of each prong is important.  The two prongs address related but distinct questions and, although similar factors are applicable to both, there is not a complete overlap.  It is not necessarily the case that every factor relevant to an assessment of whether a youth sentence would hold a young person accountable is relevant to the question of whether the Crown has rebutted the presumption. … [A]s closely connected as the two prongs -- the presumption and the issue of accountability -- are, there is a risk associated with considering the Crown's application to have the young person sentenced as an adult in a blended analysis in which the presumption and accountability are dealt with together.  The risk is that a factor relevant only to one of the two prongs may be relied upon to support a finding in relation to the other.
    
I must also be careful in considering cases prior to the enactment of the Safe Streets and Communities Act, S.C. 2012, c. 1, wherein it states subsection 38(2) of the YCJA is amended by adding paragraph (f), which reads: (f)  subject to paragraph (c), the sentence may have the following objectives: (i)  to denounce unlawful conduct, and (ii)  to deter the young person from committing offences.
 
Prior to this, the objectives of denunciation and deterrence were not part of sentencing a young person under the YCJA.
    
Finally, I must be cautious in considering cases from outside Manitoba.  As noted in section 38(2)(b) of the YCJA, "the sentence must be similar to the sentences imposed in the region on similar young persons found guilty of the same offence committed in similar circumstances" (emphasis added). R. v. K.(Cr.) and K.(Ct.), 2006 ONCJ 283 (CanLII)
    
This sentencing occurred before the Supreme Court of Canada's decision in D.B., but after the Ontario Court of Appeal declared a presumption of an adult sentence for murder to be unconstitutional.  The onus was on the Crown to show the defendant young persons should be sentenced as adults; however, the two-pronged test had not yet been articulated.  Instead, the sentencing judge approached the question of an adult sentence this way:
 The issue then becomes whether the blend of considerations — the aggravating and mitigating circumstances of the offence, age, background etc., and those considerations and principles in section 38 — are such as to render this case exceptional and to take it outside of the range where the youth sentence can hold the offender to account — again, importantly, keeping in mind that we are talking about "fair and proportionate accountability" that is consistent with the greater dependency of young persons and their reduced level of maturity.
 
    
The two young persons were convicted of first degree murder in the death of their mother.  They were fifteen and sixteen years old at the time they drowned their mother, who was drunk and had consumed several Tylenol 3's that the young persons made available to her.  The Court concluded that youth sentences were appropriate.
    
The mother was an alcoholic who neglected her daughters (the two young persons) in many ways.  In the summer before the murder, the mother lost her job and was drinking heavily.  The family's home life deteriorated severely.
    
The offence was premeditated to an extreme degree in that it was a plan that was months in the making.  The two young persons had pre-planned a false alibi and cover‑up.
    
Both young persons were described as very intelligent and excelled at school prior to the murder.  Neither had a criminal record or a history of anti-social behaviour.  They had little guidance or positive parental influence and were largely left to develop their own value system. R. v. J.A.P., 2008 BCSC 1259 (CanLII)
    
This sentencing occurred shortly before the Supreme Court of Canada's decision in D.B.
    
J.A.P. was convicted of second degree murder in the shooting death of his mother.  He was fourteen years old at the time of the offence.  However, he was not arrested until seven years after the offence. 
The Court concluded that a youth sentence was appropriate.
    
J.A.P. was the product of a very dysfunctional family.  His relationship with his mother seriously deteriorated when she returned to the family after a year away.  On several occasions his mother became physically abusive towards him, and she exposed herself to him while making demeaning comments about him.
    
The pre-sentence report did not disclose any psychological disorder, and noted J.A.P. appeared to have some insight into his problems and pro-social attitudes.
    
The sentencing judge concluded that a youth sentence was appropriate for the following reasons:  (1) the offence was very much a product of the dysfunctional family background and J.A.P.'s dependency and reduced level of maturity; (2) J.A.P. was very young at the time of the offence; (3) J.A.P. was twenty-three years old at the time of sentencing and had not significantly re-offended; and (4) while J.A.P. needed further counselling and insight into his behaviour, he was a reasonable candidate to successfully complete a program of rehabilitation. R. v. J.J.H., 2010 MBQB 177 (CanLII)
    
Although decided well after D.B., the sentencing Court did not approach the task with the two-pronged test.
    
J.J.H. pled guilty to two counts of second degree murder.  He was fourteen years old when he shot and killed his adoptive mother and adoptive five-year-old sister, who happened upon the murder of their mother.  The Court concluded that a youth sentence was appropriate because J.J.H. was very young at the time of the offence and he was striking back at a situation that had been building in him since his very early years.
    
J.J.H.'s birth mother was reported to have been involved in the sex trade and J.J.H. was given over to his birth father to raise.  His birth father suffered from substance abuse issues.  After his birth father was arrested for homicide, J.J.H. was placed in foster care and then adopted when he was three years old.  The adoption report indicated "there were frequent changes in care providers and that there had been severe physical abuse".
    
J.J.H.'s relationship with his adoptive parents was strained and, in particular, J.J.H. and his adoptive mother did not get along.  There was evidence that J.J.H.'s adoptive mother would erupt into rages, had been violent with J.J.H., would threaten to send J.J.H. back to Child and Family Services, and would threaten to kill him if he did not behave.  In sum, J.J.H. suffered regular physical and emotional abuse from his adoptive mother.
    
J.J.H. was diagnosed with Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, Reactive Attachment Disorder, and narcissistic personality organization.  One of the doctors stated J.J.H.'s emotional repertoire was negative with anxiety, insecurity and anger as a result of growing up in an angry, chronically dangerous and frightening home environment.  The two doctors who assessed J.J.H. concluded that he struck back in rage on the day of the murders. R. v. A.A., 2011 ABQB 598 (CanLII)
    
Although decided well after D.B., the Court did not undertake the two-pronged approach.
    
A.A. was convicted of first degree murder in the death of his uncle, a major cocaine dealer.  The Court concluded that a youth sentence was appropriate.
    
A.A. was seventeen years old at the time of the murder.  He lived with and helped his uncle in the cocaine business.  A.A.'s uncle kicked A.A. out of his residence because he thought A.A. had stolen cocaine from him.  In the evening leading up to the murder, A.A. removed a substantial quantity of drugs and cash from his uncle's residence.  While at his residence, he later fired seven shots at his uncle, three of which hit his body and killed him.
    
A.A. did not have a prior criminal record but had a past in the drug trade.  He came from a troubled background.  His mother pursued a lifestyle of risk in a tumultuous relationship with his father who had a serious criminal record.  A.A. did not have a pro‑social, supportive family.
    
At twenty-one years old, A.A. was working on credits to complete his high school diploma.  He was described by one instructor as a responsible student.  He had a history of anxiety and depression. R. v. B.L., 2013 MBQB 89 (CanLII)
    
When B.L. was sixteen years old, he led a home invasion robbery, and less than a month later, while on bail, mugged a woman on the street.  The Court found that the Crown had rebutted the presumption.
    
B.L. was assessed as being of borderline to low average intelligence and to be at a grade two to three level for reading and grade three to four level for mathematics.  His childhood home was dysfunctional and he was neglected.  However, at the time of the offence his home life had improved significantly.
    
The Court found that the circumstances of the robberies demonstrated B.L. had the moral capacity of an adult.  The home invasion was planned and B.L. was the leader of the robbers.  Before and during the offences, B.L. demonstrated independent judgment and foresight.  While his cognitive abilities were limited, he understood society's values.  He made the choice to pursue a criminal lifestyle in that he wanted to be a gangster and wanted to lead criminal associates. R. v. Sinclair and Murdock (19 March 2015), Winnipeg YO 13-01-32621 (Man. Q.B.)
 
    
Sinclair and Murdock were found guilty of second degree murder.  They had previously entered guilty pleas to assault with a weapon in relation to a second victim during the same event.  The Court concluded that the Crown had rebutted the presumption.
    
Sinclair and Murdock were fifteen years old when they were at a drinking party.  When Sinclair went out to buy more supplies for the party, he saw a group of people in a backyard.  One of these people said something about belonging to a street gang (the Indian Posse) that was a rival of the gang to which Sinclair was affiliated (the Warriors).
    
Later that night, Sinclair and Murdock decided to arm themselves and go back to find the Indian Posse group.  The members of the Indian Posse fled, leaving a young, pregnant woman alone in the backyard. 
Sinclair and Murdock attacked her; however, she survived.  When her father came out to rescue her, Sinclair and Murdock attacked him with a baseball bat, breaking or fracturing virtually every bone in his head and killing him.
    
In concluding that the presumption had been rebutted, the sentencing judge noted that the offence was particularly horrendous, there was a degree of planning the attack by securing weapons and returning to the backyard, and there was a gang element to the crime.  He also noted that Sinclair and Murdock had prior criminal records under the youth court system.  They had been in receipt of all the youth court system had to offer, to no avail. R. v. Okemow, 2017 MBCA 59, 2017 CarswellMan 288 (WL Can) (C.A.)
    
Okemow pled guilty to fourteen offences that occurred when he was fourteen years old.  The most serious of the offences related to two armed robberies.  The Court of Appeal upheld the sentencing judge's decision that the presumption had been rebutted.
    
Okemow had been diagnosed with Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder ("FASD") and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder ("ADHD").  While the sentencing judge took that into account, she found that the presumption had been rebutted because Okemow had demonstrated a pattern of violent behaviour where he was the "instigator or leader" in the offences, he had a prior criminal record in which the violence continued to escalate, and the offences in question involved some degree of planning.
    
The sentencing judge concluded, and the Court of Appeal agreed, that in light of all the other considerations, Okemow should not receive a youth sentence simply because of his cognitive limitations. R. v. McClements, 2017 MBCA 104 (CanLII)
    
McClements pled guilty to second degree murder.  In the middle of an afternoon, he shot a stranger twice in the back.  The Court of Appeal upheld the sentencing judge's decision that the presumption had been rebutted.
    
McClements was seventeen years four months old at the time of the offence.  He was a member of a street gang. 
He was carrying a loaded semi-automatic handgun with a silencer.  He had no criminal record at the time of the offence.
    
The Court of Appeal noted that McClements did not suffer from any cognitive or emotional disability that would prevent him from appreciating the moral consequences of his actions.  The Court also noted that the sentencing judge found that McClements was "functioning at a level of independence and maturity beyond his years" at the time of the offence (see para. 64).
    
The Court of Appeal found that based on McClements' "age at the time of the offence, his independent lifestyle living as an adult at the time of the offence, his choice to associate with a street gang and engage in a criminal lifestyle, his choice to carry a semi-automatic gun and his crime of violence and high risk taking", the Crown rebutted the presumption (see para. 65). R. v. M.W., 2017 ONCA 22 (CanLII)
    
Two young offenders were convicted of first degree murder in the execution-style killing of another youth.  The presumption had not been rebutted for either offender.
    
With regard to one of the two young offenders ("T.F."), the Court considered that he had various disorders, a learning disability, witnessed his mother suffer violence at the hands of his stepfather, and had been suspended from school fifteen times.  The Court also noted that his early involvement in the criminal justice system could be viewed as demonstrative of his ignoring society's norms.  T.F. lived in a community of disadvantaged youth and was influenced by anti-social peers.  Despite these challenges, he did very well while in custody.  He was described as task-oriented, focused and highly motivated.  He graduated from high school while in custody and had completed some college courses.  He also completed programming.
    
The Court noted that the evolution of T.F.'s maturity while in custody highlighted the lesser degree of T.F.'s maturity at the time of the offence.  The Court was not satisfied that the Crown had rebutted the presumption.
    
As for the second young offender ("M.W."), the Court also concluded that the Crown had not rebutted the presumption.
    
M.W. was not present when the murder took place.  M.W.'s role was to relay key information to another and help implement the plan.  After the shooting, M.W. participated in diverting suspicion onto other individuals.  He was not a leader in the offence.
    
M.W.'s father suffered from addictions, and he abused M.W.'s mother.  M.W. was diagnosed with ADHD; however, he refused to take medication.  He was susceptible to negative peer influences and belonged to the same anti-social group as T.F.  He was suspended from school nineteen times, and he had a prior criminal record.
    
The Court concluded that the actions M.W. took in the murder did not show a level of moral maturity or judgment beyond that of an adolescent.  His conduct was immature, impulsive and ill-considered. R. v. P.H., 2017 BCSC 1105 (CanLII)
    
P.H. was convicted of second degree murder. 
He and others planned to rob someone who had advertised a cell phone and watch for sale online.  They arranged a place to meet with the seller.  However, the seller did not show up.  While the others began to leave, P.H. waited.  When a completely innocent bystander walked past, P.H. hit him in the head with a baseball bat.  When he fell, P.H. hit him two more times.  The Court held that the Crown had not rebutted the presumption.
    
P.H. was sixteen years eight months old at the time of the offence and in grade eleven.  He had a stable family life and upbringing.  He did not have a prior criminal record.
    
P.H. was diagnosed with ADHD, and the forensic assessment described he had difficulty controlling his anger; however, he was cognitively mature, socially appropriate with reasonable intelligence.
    
The sentencing judge accepted one doctor's conclusion that P.H. seemed to have acted impulsively, that impulsivity is a central component of ADHD and it was heightened by the impulsivity that is normative of adolescent experience.
    
The sentencing judge concluded that P.H.'s conduct showed immaturity and impulsiveness rather than the insight into the wrongdoing of a more mature, reflective or considered adult. R. v. Anderson, 2018 MBCA 42 (CanLII)
    
Anderson, who was sixteen years old, pled guilty to the second degree murder of a cognitively challenged teenager.  The Court of Appeal described the murder as horrific:  Anderson followed the victim after having sexual intercourse with her, attacked her from behind and bludgeoned her to death with a rock because he did not want her to tell anyone they had had sex.  The Court of Appeal upheld the sentencing judge's decision that the Crown had rebutted the presumption.
    
In considering moral blameworthiness, the Court stated the circumstances of the murder and its immediate cover-up reasonably dispelled a presumption that this was the action of an individual with heightened vulnerability, less maturity and a reduced capacity for moral judgment (see D.B. at para. 41).  The Court of Appeal considered the following: •          
The decision to murder was based on the exercise of judgment and a foresight of the long-term consequences of what would occur to the young person's reputation if it was revealed he was having sex with the victim (see para. 49). •          
The significant and brutal violence was then intentionally inflicted on a defenseless and vulnerable individual (see para. 49). •          
The actions were also the product of a sober individual who lacked any form of cognitive limitation (see para. 49). •          
During the commission of the murder, the young person had the presence of mind to consider whether he might leave handprints on the murder weapon if he held it in a certain way (see para. 49). •          
It was also relevant for the Court to consider the young person's post-offence conduct to cover up his involvement immediately after the murder up to and including his first interview by police five days after the offence (see para. 50).
    
The Court of Appeal also considered that the reports filed indicated Anderson was functioning as a normal adolescent. R. v. N.A., a.k.a. N.T-S., 2018 MBQB 93 (CanLII)
    
N.A. was convicted of manslaughter.  On the day of the offence, he obtained a knife in anticipation his friend would need it if there was a confrontation with the deceased.  The Court found that the presumption had been rebutted.[1]
    
The deceased ran across the street to confront the friend and N.A. chased after them.  N.A. stabbed the deceased once and immediately fled from the scene.  He lied to his mother about what had happened, slashed his arm to make it look like he acted in self-defence, and continued those lies for several hours when interviewed by the police.
    
N.A. was three months shy of his eighteenth birthday at the time of the offence and had no prior criminal record.  He was raised in a good family, completed grade twelve, and had completed some online university courses by the time of his sentencing.  The pre-sentence report stated he expressed empathy towards the deceased's family and took full responsibility for his actions. R. v. F. (J.M.), 2020 MBQB 161 (CanLII)
    
J.M.F. was convicted of first degree murder, having arranged an encounter with the deceased and then shooting him in the head.  He was three months shy of his seventeenth birthday at the time of the offence.  The Court held that the presumption had been rebutted.
    
J.M.F. had been diagnosed with ADHD, Oppositional Defiant Disorder, and mild Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder.  A report filed at the sentencing hearing also noted that J.M.F. exhibited some symptoms consistent with Autism Spectrum Disorder.  Despite these diagnoses, the forensic assessment concluded that J.M.F. did not present as someone with significant cognitive or learning difficulties.  He had high scores in word reading and math computation.  His maturity level was commensurate with his age.
    
J.M.F. had a prior criminal record that included violence, and he was on probation at the time of the murder.
    
The sentencing judge considered that:  the murder was not spontaneous; J.M.F. showed foresight in acquiring a rifle and ammunition; he orchestrated the circumstances of the offence; after the murder, he took steps to conceal his involvement (including an attempt to tell a witness what to say at trial); and he came from a loving home with the support of several family members.  The sentencing judge also considered that the forensic assessment concluded that J.M.F. did not have significant cognitive or learning difficulties and showed a level of maturity that was commensurate with his age. R. v. M. (H.), 2022 MBPC 42 (CanLII)
    
H.M. pled guilty to manslaughter.  He was seventeen years seven months old at the time of the offence.  Without provocation, he stabbed a stranger six times.  The Court found that the presumption had not been rebutted.
    
H.M. was an Indigenous young man whose life had been significantly impacted by the traumas of residential schools and colonialism.  He had been diagnosed with FASD and ADHD and had extremely low cognitive functioning.  He was described as a "vulnerable individual with limited capacity to organize himself and manage his own behaviour", according to the assessments provided (see para. 1).
    
The sentencing judge found that the evidence supporting H.M.'s reduced moral blameworthiness was overwhelming. She considered that the act was impulsive and unplanned.  H.M.'s moral blameworthiness was further reduced because of his FASD, his low cognitive functioning, and the circumstances of his life as an Indigenous person.  The sentencing judge found that H.M. was incapable of planning, controlling his impulses, or having a healthy, pro-social life.
                    1.       Circumstances of the Offence
    
The seriousness of the offence is a factor I must consider; however, it does not, in itself, lead to the conclusion that an adult sentence should be imposed.  What is most relevant at this stage is the level of moral judgment or sophistication demonstrated in the planning and implementation of the offence, and A.K.B.'s role in carrying out the offence.  See M.W. at para. 112.
    
For the reasons outlined in the "Facts" section above, there is no doubt the offence was extremely violent and brutal. 
A.K.B. was the sole person responsible for the offence.
    
This case is different from almost all the cases provided in that there is no clear motive or explanation for the offence.  All I can garner from the evidence is that in the months leading up to the murder, L.D. put a lot of responsibilities on A.K.B., including cooking, cleaning and shopping.  L.D. was demanding and the Crown described her relationship with A.K.B. as "suffocating".
    
In almost all the cases provided, there were much clearer explanations for the offences such as gang involvement[2], cognitive impairments[3], and/or childhood abuse and neglect[4].  I remain mindful, however, there is no onus on A.K.B. to provide an explanation for the offence.
    
A.K.B. submits that the motive evidence I do have demonstrates a lack of adult-like or mature judgment and thinking. 
Had he been thinking like an adult, A.K.B. would have instead made a mature decision such as a choice to move out of his mother's home to escape the responsibilities imposed upon him there.
    
The Crown relies heavily on A.K.B.'s post-offence conduct to rebut the presumption:  A.K.B. attempted to clean up the murder scene with bleach; he disposed of the murder weapon; he appeared calm while running errands; he took extra time to run errands at multiple locations; he sent texts to his mother while running errands; and he attempted to divert suspicion onto another suspect (C.L.) right from the time of the 9-1-1 call and his interview with police.
    
A.K.B. urges me to give no weight to the post-offence conduct because he says it is his moral culpability at the exact time of the killing that must be considered.
    
I cannot agree.  While it is just one factor to consider, the Manitoba Court of Appeal, in Anderson, has clearly stated a young person's post-offence conduct to cover up a crime is relevant:
 In the consideration of whether adult-like judgement was exercised, it is also relevant to consider the young person's post-offence conduct to cover up his involvement immediately after the murder up to and including his first interview by police five days later.  It has long been a sentencing principle that an offender's attitude after the commission of the crime sheds light on his or her degree of criminality and character (see Regina v Iwaniw (1959), 1959 CanLII 622 (MB CA), 127 CCC 40 at 51 (Man CA)).
 Callous behaviour to a victim post-offence or attempting to cover up the commission of an offence may support a finding of a heightened degree of moral blameworthiness.  Here, the lack of panic and display of self-assuredness by the young person after the initial blow and his successful efforts to cover up the murder and hide from detection in the small community was evidence which was open to the judge to accept as demonstrating heightened moral blameworthiness or culpability.  In my view, the record here surrounding the circumstances of the offence reasonably supports a finding that the young person displayed "critical thinking" in carrying out the murder with the intention of successfully completing it and attempting to avoid detection for it. [citations omitted]
                   2.       A.K.B.'s Circumstances
  
A.K.B. has no prior criminal record.  All the material provided shows him to be very intelligent and capable.  The forensic reports show he does not have intellectual, emotional or psychological detriments.  There were fifty-one letters of support from family and friends filed at the sentencing hearing, which all spoke to A.K.B.'s good character.
  
At the time of the offence, A.K.B. was in high school and achieving very good grades.  He also worked part time at McDonald's where he was a valued employee.
  
A.K.B.'s parents separated when he was three years old and thereafter they shared custody.  At the time of the offence, A.K.B. spent half-time with his mother and half-time with his father, stepmother and half-sister.  His family life was healthy, and they spent a lot of time together doing pro-social activities.  A.K.B. did not pay rent or pay bills.  He would borrow a parent's car when needed.  From the evidence at trial, it appears he was mainly dependent on his parents for the necessities of life.
  
A.K.B. did not experience or witness substance abuse, violence, or sexual abuse in either parent's home.  He described to the pre-sentence report writer that he had a great relationship with his mother.  He said he also had a positive relationship with his father.
  
From the evidence at trial, there is no suggestion that A.K.B. had gang or otherwise anti-social affiliations. 
To the contrary, the sentencing material filed speaks to a young person who did not consume alcohol or drugs, and played video games with friends, and played sports before suffering concussions. IV.     CONCLUSION
  
It greatly concerns me that there is no clear evidence of why A.K.B. committed this horrible crime.  This unknown factor makes it much more difficult for me to assess moral blameworthiness. 
There is no doubt that motives or explanations such as those described in the cases above provide insight into the maturity level and moral blameworthiness of the offenders.  However, there is no onus on A.K.B. to provide such an explanation.  The onus to rebut the presumption must remain on the Crown.
  
The offence was extremely violent and A.K.B.'s post-offence conduct appeared to be calm and cool.  It was not established that A.K.B. planned and deliberated over the murder, hence the jury's verdict of second degree murder.  By all accounts L.D. was not abusing or otherwise neglecting A.K.B.
  
A.K.B. was not living independently; he was not acting on behalf of or in concert with gang activity; this was not an offence that was part of a string or pattern of offences; and A.K.B. does not have a record of escalating criminal or violent behaviour.  To the contrary, other than this crime, the evidence before me demonstrates he was a normal high school teenager who was largely dependent on his parents and was a pro‑social member of the community.
  
From the evidence, the only possible explanation for the crime was the household demands L.D. put upon A.K.B. 
The mature response would have been to decide to move out; the immature and unreasoned response was killing L.D.
  
For all the reasons set out above, I am not satisfied that the Crown has rebutted the presumption.  To summarize: •          
A.K.B. was young, as he was only sixteen years old. •          
A.K.B. was not functioning independently, outside his family homes. •          
A.K.B. was dependent on his parents. •          
The offence was an impulsive, ill-considered act that showed a lack of maturity. •          
The offence itself did not demonstrate sophistication.
  
I acknowledge that the post-offence conduct shows a level of sophistication and composure; however, when I consider that factor with all the other circumstances, I cannot find that the Crown has shown a sufficient level of moral blameworthiness to hold A.K.B. accountable as an adult.
  
Given that conclusion, I do not have to consider whether a YCJA sentence is sufficient to hold A.K.B. accountable. V.      THE SENTENCE
  
A youth sentence of seven years is imposed.
  
Four years of that sentence are to be served in custody with no credit for A.K.B.'s time in pre-trial or pre-sentence custody.  The balance of the sentence is to be served in the community and be subject to supervision.
  
I invite counsel to make submissions about the conditions that should be imposed as part of the conditional supervision.
  
Lastly, the following orders will be made:
