./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/ca/2023abca3.html
              The appellant appeals his conviction on a number of drug and weapons related charges. He did not appear on the date scheduled for the appeal and he failed to instruct his counsel relative to the appeal. The Crown further advises that the appellant failed to appear for sentencing and an arrest warrant was issued that remains outstanding. He did file a factum and the appeal has been perfected. Accordingly, the panel decided it would hear the appeal in the appellant’s absence as is permitted under r 14.32(3) of the Rules of Court.
              The appellant argued at trial that police breached his s 8 and 9 Charter rights because police lacked reasonable suspicion to detain him. He argued further that absent his lawful detention, the search of his person was also unlawful. The trial judge found that police had reasonable suspicion to ground the appellant’s arrest and further that the search incidental to arrest was lawful. The appellant appeals these findings on grounds that even considering the constellation of factors the trial judge considered, they do not meet the well-known reasonable suspicion test. If the detention was unlawful so too was the search of the appellant’s person. We disagree.
              The trial judge provided comprehensive and particularized fact findings and reasons for her decision: 2020 ABQB 793. She described the applicable legal principles consistently with what this Court later said in R v Julom, 2022 ABCA 198. The appellant does not argue the facts found were in error. Rather, only that they did not rise to the level of reasonable suspicion. 
              Ultimately, the trial judge’s findings of fact are entitled to deference. After listing the factors that Constable Farrand testified aroused his suspicion and specifically recognizing that these factors must be considered together and not individually, she found Constable Farrand’s reasonable suspicion was based on objectively discernable facts. She also distinguished R v Le, 2019 SCC 34, 2 SCR 692, on grounds that events were unfolding for police in real time and the police would have been derelict in their duty had they not stopped the appellant. 
              We discern no error in the trial judge’s conclusion the constellation of factors she articulated in paragraph 86 of her reasons and further discussed in paragraphs 89 to 94, objectively disclose there was a credibly based possibility the appellant was involved in the shooting and his detention did not breach s 9 of the Charter. It follows from the appellant’s arguments there was no breach of s 8 either.
 
 
              The appeal is dismissed. 
