./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/ca/2023abca7.html
              In September of 2011, the appellant was involved in a brief romantic relationship. He became possessive and controlling. He called the woman continuously as a means of monitoring her activities with others. One evening he found her at a bowling alley talking with another man. He threatened to harm the man and then himself with a machete. That scared the woman, who refused to see him again. He then left messages on her phone, threatening to stalk her. 
              She reported the matter to the police who, upon locating the appellant, arrested him. Following the arrest, the appellant became agitated in the police car and, when removed from the car, repeatedly attempted to kick the police officer. At the police station he kicked another officer and later, upon being transferred to the Remand Centre, he threatened a police officer and the officer’s family and spit at him. The appellant was charged for his actions against the police. 
              Prior to trial he was sent for a psychiatric assessment. The examining psychiatrist concluded the appellant may have a defence under section 16 of the Criminal Code, namely that he suffered from a mental disorder that rendered him incapable of appreciating the nature and quality of his acts or knowing they were wrong.
              That diagnosis appears to have been accepted by the trial judge without analysis, and by the appellant without objection. 
              Significantly, upon transfer to the Alberta Hospital pursuant to a warrant of committal, the appellant was placed in the care of another forensic psychiatrist, Dr. Brown. Upon completing his assessment, Dr. Brown concluded the appellant was not, and had not been, suffering a mental disorder or disease of the mind as contemplated by section 16 of the Criminal Code, rather, that he had a border-line personality disorder, an anti-social personality as well as a cannabis use disorder. That diagnosis was consistent with the appellant’s behaviour. This leads us to question whether the appellant qualified at first instance for a not criminally responsible (“NCR”) verdict and should not have been sent to the Alberta Hospital.
              Still, for the past 10 years, the appellant has been kept at the Alberta Hospital where efforts were made to treat him for his impulsive, threatening behaviour, with only limited success. During this time, he has threatened staff, damaged a television by punching it in anger, violated numerous hospital rules, and, while on a pass, threatened another casual romantic partner and her family when she wanted to break up with him. For the latter offence, he was charged criminally and sentenced to time served to be followed by two years probation. Notably, a section 16 defence was not advanced in response to these charges.
              In addition, the appellant escaped from the hospital and was at large for nine months in British Columbia until he was apprehended.
              As required, the appellant’s status has been reviewed by the Review Board on an annual basis. The Review Board’s ruling following the last review is the subject of this appeal. The appellant has asked for an absolute discharge or, alternatively, that he be allowed to live with his parents in Camrose, Alberta, while subject only to a conditional discharge. The Crown, supported by Dr. Brown’s assessment, opposed both proposals, arguing that an absolute discharge was premature as the appellant would not voluntarily participate in further treatment without which he was a significant risk to re-offend in behaviour that would cause, not physical, but psychological harm. For this reason, the Crown asked the appellant remain subject to full warrant. 
              Ultimately, the Review Board decided a full warrant was necessary and appropriate. However, the Review Board directed the hospital staff to explore the possibility of transitioning the appellant to Camrose where he could live with his parents, while subject to a conditional warrant. 
          Notably, after the appeal was filed but before it could be heard, the appellant was allowed to live in Camrose with his parents while still subject to a full warrant. We understand that to be the situation to date.
          Still, the appellant appeals the Review Board’s disposition order alleging that the Review Board’s finding that he was a significant threat to the safety of the public was unreasonable, unsupported by the evidence, and that the Review Board erred by failing to account for the mandatory factors in section 672.54 of the Criminal Code.
          We agree to the following extent. The Review Board referred to Dr. Brown’s assessment that there was a low risk the appellant would cause serious physical harm. The Review Board further noted that the appellant posed a greater risk of causing psychological harm to the public as opposed to physical harm. In view of these observations, it would have been appropriate for the Review Board to offer some indication of the type of psychological harm of concern to them; that is, was it of the same threatening nature against women as that evidenced in 2011, and again in 2019. It also would have been appropriate for the Review Board to offer some indication of the degree or extent of risk of the appellant causing psychological harm, and whether such risk has been reduced by the treatment the appellant has received over the past decade at the Alberta Hospital. 
          We note the appellant is soon to have his next annual review. Mindful of the Supreme Court’s observation in R v Owen, 2003 SCC 33 (CanLII), 1 SCR 779, that the potential harm must be serious such that neither a small risk of grave harm, nor a high risk of trivial harm, is sufficient, we ask the Review Board to specifically address the issue in Owen, and to indicate the nature and extent of psychological harm the appellant is at risk of inflicting if discharged absolutely.
          There is however another, more pressing concern. As noted in our introductory comments, it appears that after the initial assessment, the appellant’s treating psychiatrist, Dr. Brown, determined that while the appellant has personality disorders, he does not suffer from a mental disorder or disease of the mind; a condition precedent to an NCR finding that would exempt him from criminal liability.
          Accordingly, we ask the Review Board to expressly address that issue and indicate whether the appellant ever qualified to be exempt from criminal liability on account of mental disorder as contemplated by section 16 of the Criminal Code, and whether he currently suffers a disease of the mind as contemplated in that provision. If, as we expect, the answer is no, then we ask the Review Board to address why the appellant should not be absolutely discharged. 
          Lastly, we heard that the appellant may be pursuing an appeal of the original finding of NCR, and would obviously need an order granting an extension of time to appeal. If that path is followed, in the interests of judicial economy, such an application can be brought to any member of this panel
