./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/ca/2023abca23.html
              The deceased was brutally hacked and beaten to death. At trial, the appellant put forward the theory that he did not participate in the killing, but rather intervened as it was occurring. The trial judge, sitting without a jury, convicted the appellant of second-degree murder in relation to the killing. The appellant’s brother pleaded guilty to manslaughter on an earlier occasion for his involvement in the killing. 
              The appellant raises one ground of appeal. He argues the trial judge erred in allowing the Crown to cross-examine him on the testimony he was compelled by subpoena to provide in his brother’s preliminary inquiry contrary to s 13 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
              The record supports the conclusion that the Crown sought to cross-examine the appellant on his preliminary inquiry testimony to test his credibility. The Crown told the trial judge the purpose of cross-examination on the preliminary hearing transcript was to highlight some of the inconsistencies between the appellant’s evidence at trial and his evidence as a witness in his brother’s preliminary inquiry. 
              The appellant’s trial counsel opposed the cross-examination, arguing that the proffered evidence was not inconsistent or, if it was, it was not only relevant to the appellant’s credibility, but also served to incriminate him.
              The appellant now argues that because some of the evidence he gave at the preliminary inquiry was incriminating, the evidence in its entirety ought to have been protected and excluded from cross-examination at trial. Instead, he argues, the trial judge parsed the evidence into incriminating and non-incriminating evidence and permitted the Crown to cross-examine on the latter. He argues the trial judge erred in applying R v Nedelcu, 2012 SCC 59, 3 SCR 311 and allowing the Crown’s cross-examination where, in the circumstances of this case, it has no application.
              The appellant further argues that even if Nedelcu were properly applied, the evidence in question was nevertheless incriminating and the trial judge ought not to have permitted the Crown to cross-examine on it. He argues that the curative proviso cannot be applied, and that a new trial must be ordered to ensure fair trial process.
              In our view, the trial judge correctly applied the law in Nedelcu and correctly determined that the evidence in question was not incriminating. 
2.      Factual Background
              The offending evidence in this case relates to the appellant’s memory about his shirt – where he took it off and where he left it. That he took it off was not in dispute.
              At his brother’s preliminary inquiry, the appellant testified he did not remember where he took off his shirt. At his trial, the trial judge stated that “[a]t the very least, [the appellant] provided increased detail in his trial testimony. He had moved from a lack of recollection to a potential recollection of the shirt’s location”.[1]
          The specific passages of concern are found at paras 614-618:
Location of Mr. Soosay’s Shirt
In this trial, Mr. Soosay said that he took off his shirt in the middle of the kitchen and dining room area. He put it on the table. About putting the shirt on the table, he said he was “pretty sure,” that’s where “I know I think I took it off.” But he was sure that he was in the kitchen and dining room area.
In the PS Preliminary Inquiry, Mr. Soosay had testified that he did not remember where he had taken off his shirt. 
At the very least, Mr. Soosay provided increased detail in his trial testimony. He had moved from a lack of recollection to a potential recollection of the shirt’s location.
On the level of what actually happened, Mr. Soosay doubtless took his shirt off upstairs before he fled from the house. Emily said he wasn’t wearing a shirt, so he didn’t have it on [in] the basement. The bloodstains on the kitchen table could make the kitchen a reasonable location for taking off the shirt, although other parts of the main floor could not be excluded. 
This reflection, though, is beside the point of the change in his testimony and specifically the difference between his trial testimony and PS Preliminary Inquiry testimony.
          While the trial judge briefly considered what might be said about where the appellant removed his shirt, he quickly discounted that evidence. He expressly stated that in so far as he was concerned, the significance in the appellant’s evidence was the difference between the preliminary inquiry and trial evidence. 
           The trial judge went on at para 624 to say:
The Materiality of the Inconsistencies
None of the inconsistencies concern a material fact. None concerns the unfolding of the attack on Mr. Nepoose or material features of Mr. Soosay’s pre- or post-attack conduct. None concerns exculpatory facts. Whether others used drugs or Ms. Ward used the mop, whether Mr. Soosay remembered or didn’t remember where he put his shirt are ancillary details. Nothing turns on these matters. This is true, but this does not negate the corrosive effect of inconsistencies on his testimony. If Mr. Soosay cannot be trusted on small or ancillary issues, the concern is that he cannot be trusted on more important issues.
This followed the trial judge’s caution to himself that the appellant “is presumed innocent and an innocent person must be entitled to testify without his words being filtered through a prejudgment of falsehood”: para 576. The trial judge recognized that doing so would amount to “a presumption of guilt”: para 576.
           The trial judge then went on to consider inconsistencies in the evidence given at trial and in the other available evidence, with a view to assessing the credibility and reliability of the appellant’s evidence. 
3.      Decision
          Cross-examining to incriminate is distinct from cross-examining to impeach credibility. The majority in Nedelcu highlights that distinction and clearly states that only incriminating evidence will trigger s 13 protection; s 13 is not triggered simply by compelled evidence of “any kind” nor does it extend protection to non-incriminating evidence: Nedelcu at para 29. “Incriminating evidence" is "something ‘from which a trier of fact may infer that an accused is guilty of the crime charged'": Nedelcu at para 29, citing R v Henry, 2005 SCC 76 at para 25, 3 SCR 609. Discerning (i.e., “parsing”) whether evidence in a prior proceeding meets that threshold and is “incriminating” in the above sense is not unusual in criminal trials.
           The appellant’s evidence about his shirt was similar to the evidence discussed in Nedelcu, where the accused had no memory of specific events at the preliminary inquiry but recalled those same events in detail at the trial. In this case, at the preliminary inquiry, the appellant did not recall where he left his shirt. At his trial, the appellant had a significantly enriched memory about the shirt. The trial judge did not find evidence about the shirt to be material. It did not factor into his analysis beyond the stated concern – if the appellant was not consistent on minor, less relevant, or irrelevant details, the trial judge may not be able to trust him on more important issues. 
          In our view, the trial judge correctly stated and applied the law. Section 13 is directed at the use of earlier evidence after its character has been assessed in the proceeding in which a party seeks to use it. The trial judge was careful to consider the impugned evidence considering s 13 and its stated purpose. His reasons for allowing the evidence are found at para 602:
[…]
•      s. 13 applies to a witness who was “compelled” to testify in prior proceedings; Mr. Soosay was subpoenaed to testify in the PS Preliminary Inquiry and his trial is an “other proceeding” within the meaning of s. 13.
•   s. 13 does not immunize from cross-examination on all evidence given in the prior proceeding (it is not a “blanket” immunity).
•   s. 13 does immunize from having “incriminating evidence” given in the prior proceeding used to “incriminate that witness” in the subsequent proceeding.
•   “the time for determining whether the evidence given at the prior proceeding may properly be characterized as ‘incriminating evidence’ is the time when the Crown seeks to use it at the subsequent hearing:” Nedelcu at para 16.
•      “incriminating evidence” is evidence that the Crown could use, if permitted, to prove guilt, evidence that could be used to prove or to assist in proving an essential element of the charged offence: Nedelcu at paras 9, 10.
•      evidence that could be used only for the purpose of causing the trier of fact to reject an accused’s trial testimony does not, by itself, create “incriminating evidence” for the Crown (rejected evidence is not evidence of guilt): Nedelcu at paras 21-23.
•   hence, the use for the purpose of impeachment alone of non-incriminatory evidence given in the prior proceeding is not forbidden by s. 13: Nedelcu at para 25.
•      […] cross-examination of Mr. Soosay by the Crown respecting the areas of Mr. Soosay’s PS Preliminary Inquiry testimony I permitted did not allow the Crown to use “incriminating evidence.” The evidence did not concern the facts material to the charge faced by Mr. Soosay and his defence to that charge, and was relevant for purposes of impeachment only.
          In any event, on the record that is before this Court, even if the trial judge wrongly characterized the disputed evidence as non-incriminating, the result would have been the same given the very limited role this evidence played in his overall reasoning process. The trial judge gave numerous other reasons to support his finding that the Crown had met its burden. For example, he found that the appellant’s account of the blood distribution relied on too many unlikely coincidences to have any plausibility. The trial judge’s other reasons were not challenged. 
          We agree with the Crown that the quantity and probity of the Crown’s evidence was so overwhelming that notwithstanding the error alleged, the trial judge would not have accepted the appellant’s account of his involvement in the killing and would have convicted him.
          Further, we agree with the Crown that the inconsistencies that eroded the appellant’s credibility and reliability came from sources other than his testimony in the preliminary inquiry, namely: inconsistencies between his testimony at trial and his police interview, inconsistencies internal to his testimony, and inconsistencies between his testimony and other evidence in the trial. 
          Following the above, we conclude that there is no substantial wrong or miscarriage of justice in this case.
          The appeal is dismissed.
