./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/ca/2023abca18.html
              The appellant, Urthurton Phiri, appeals his ten-month sentence after trial, for fraud over $5000. The appellant was also sentenced to 24 months probation and a restitution order jointly with his co-accused, in the amount of $15,000.
              The appellant’s co-accused, Sebulelo Moeketsi, was sentenced to 6 months incarceration, and a similar probation term. The appellant argues that the sentencing judge erred in failing to properly apply the parity principle, and in her treatment of aggravating and mitigating factors.
              The fraud took place over the course of two to three days in the complainant’s taxi and much of the incident was captured on video though a dash camera. The complainant was led to believe that Ms Moeketsi was dealing in precious gemstones and selling them through a middleman, the appellant. Ms Moeketsi (“Wanda” in the scheme), the appellant (“Lucky”), and a third party, “Martin” (who was never located), acted out this business arrangement in the complainant’s presence. When an ostensible difficulty arose with the appellant being able to pay Ms Moeketsi a deposit, the appellant invited the complainant to invest in the business by financing the required $15,000; the appellant told the complainant he would receive a return on his investment of half of the middleman’s commission fee. The complainant ultimately obtained money from his own and his wife’s savings to pay the deposit, including trips to two different banks on the suggestion of the appellant after his first withdrawal yielded only $10,000. Subsequently, the appellant and Ms Moeketsi disappeared, and the gems that the complainant had been provided as collateral were determined to be nothing more than landscaping rocks. 
              At the hearing, the Crown sought a sentence of 8-12 months for the appellant; the defence submitted that 90 days intermittent was appropriate, followed by two years probation. 
              The sentencing judge found that the fraud was a well-planned scheme dependent on each character’s role in the gem transaction. She found that the “moral culpability of each of [the] offenders is high”; the record did not disclose “serious financial pressure” faced by either accused outside of greed, and there did not appear to be “any remorse or hesitation in those who played their assigned roles”. “While Ms. Moeketsi did less and did not create a personal relationship between herself and [the complainant, like the appellant did], her responsibility is the same as Mr. Phiri’s. Without the role of Wanda, the scheme could not be complete.” 
              As to the gravity of the offence, the sentencing judge found that fraud causes serious harm in our society and noted the complainant’s specific loss of work when he could not immediately return to driving his taxi having become distrustful of the public. She held: “cab drivers are in a vulnerable position vis-à-vis the conduct of their passengers... fraud undermines the foundations of the economy by reducing what I would describe as commercial trust among our citizens. This fraud is a devastating offence to the victim because it is basically a betrayal. . . [of] a budding friendship and commercial relationship.”
              In sentencing the appellant to 10 months, she noted the appellant’s circumstances as a 40-year-old immigrant from Zimbabwe and a single father of two children. While trained as a massage therapist, the appellant’s health had been an issue for a number of years, causing him to rely on social assistance; family finances were “a struggle”. The appellant’s pre-sentence report was found to be generally positive, but the writer had concerns about the appellant’s limited support network and ability to manage his health and stress, and his lack of a plan to return to work. The appellant also had a criminal record consisting of four offences of impaired driving, unlawful possession of identity documents, and breach of a driving prohibition, all between 2010-2019.
              In dealing specifically with the difference between the appellant’s 10-month sentence and the lesser six-month sentence imposed on his co-accused, the sentencing judge found as follows:
. . . I have concluded that the difference in the length of the jail sentences to be imposed is justified on the facts of the case. Ms. Moeketsi’s shorter period in jail is explained by the fact that she has no record and did not build up the personal relationship with the victim. Mr. Phiri’s slightly longer period in jail is explained by the fact that he has [an escalating] record, he chose the victim, and he took the larger role in creating the relationship, which he ultimately betrayed, with the victim. He also encouraged the victim to go to many banks to avoid bank rules limiting the sum of money a client could withdraw in one day, rules enacted in order to prevent this type of fraud.
She further noted that another “powerful” mitigating factor in Ms Moeketsi’s favour was that she “support[s] and cares for her [four] children”; no similar mitigation was found related to the appellant’s role as a single father.
              On appeal, the appellant submits that the 4-month discrepancy in sentence between him and his co-accused was not justified in the circumstances of this case. The appellant urges that while a modest elevation in sentence was warranted to account for his record, the additional four months imposed was a marked and unwarranted difference justifying appellate intervention. 
          The issue therefore is whether the sentencing judge committed an error in principle that had a material impact on the sentence imposed such that this Court should step in and particularly, lower the appellant’s sentence to be more in keeping with the six-month sentence imposed on his co-accused. More specifically, the appellant argues that the sentencing judge failed to give due weight to the principle of parity between the two offenders by erring as follows: 
a)      finding the appellant’s more extensive role with the complainant justified a longer sentence; 
b)      finding that the appellant encouraged the complainant to subvert bank transaction limits;
c)      failing to give due consideration to the appellant’s family circumstances which was otherwise found to be a mitigating factor for his co-accused, and;
d)      misapprehending the Crown’s position on sentence to be 12-18 months, rather than the requested 8-12 months.
Lastly, the appellant argues that that trial judge erred in finding that the appellant’s maturity and the fact that the complainant was a taxi driver, were aggravating factors.
           In its narrow sense, parity can mean that equivalent co-offenders should receive equivalent sentences, or that differently situated co-offenders should receive sentences that rationally reflect their differences.  However, while parity must be considered, it is not an overriding principle; the sentencing process is by its very nature, an individualized process. In R v LM, 2008 SCC 31 at para 36, 2 SCR 163, the Supreme Court of Canada held that even for offences of a same type, the “principle of parity does not preclude disparity where warranted by the circumstances” (emphasis in original). “There will, of course, be cases where the circumstances of the co-accused are sufficiently different to warrant significantly different sentences, such as where one co-accused has a lengthy related criminal record or played a much greater role in the commission of the offence”: R v Christie, 2004 ABCA 287 at para 19. In a broader sense, the “question is always whether the sentence reflects the gravity of the offence, the offender’s degree of responsibility, and the unique circumstances of each case”: R v Parranto, 2021 SCC 46 at para 12, 463 DLR (4th) 389. 
          In this case, the sentencing judge found that the appellant played a larger and more prolonged role in the deception and ultimate defrauding of the complainant. These findings were open to the sentencing judge and together with the appellant’s prior record, warranted the disparity in sentencing as between the appellant and his co-accused in the circumstances of this case. As the appellant has acknowledged, an elevation in sentence was to be expected given his record and, in our view, the additional four months is not of such a “marked” difference or disparity from his co-accused that appellate intervention is required.
          The sentencing judge was further entitled to find that the appellant was aware the complainant withdrew the daily limit of funds from his bank account, and notwithstanding, pressed the complainant to make up the would-be shortfall by going to another bank. We are also not satisfied the complainant’s occupation as a taxi driver was irrelevant; rather, it was the complainant’s exposure in his employment capacity that the appellant and his co-accused exploited to facilitate the fraud. The sentencing judge never equated the complainant’s vulnerability in these circumstances to that of experiencing violence at the hands of a passenger; however, she was not wrong to conclude that “cab drivers are in a vulnerable position vis-à-vis the conduct of their passengers... fraud undermines the foundations of the economy by reducing what I would describe as commercial trust among our citizens.” This was indeed the experience of the complainant (and his family) in this matter.
          Moreover, we conclude the while the sentencing judge may have wrongly stated the Crown’s position on sentence as that of 12-18 months in her reasons, this appears to be nothing more than a misstatement. As to the balance of the appellant’s submissions, while a different judge may have weighed aggravating and mitigating factors differently or the evidence itself, we do not find that she made any error in principle in weighing these factors that had a material impact on the sentence imposed.  The co-accused was similarly found to be a mature offender, and any collateral consideration of her parenting situation did not yield to a substantially lower sentence.
          In sum, the sentence was demonstrably fit and there is no basis for appellate intervention. 
          The appellant was granted bail pending this appeal.  We acknowledge and agree with the Crown’ submission that it is not in the interests of justice to reincarcerate the appellant; there will therefore be no surrender order.
          The appeal is dismissed.
