./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/ca/2023abca26.html
              The appellant, Jessie Crier, appeals his 18-month global sentence, plus two years probation, for two offences of uttering death threats against his former domestic partner and her new partner, and a police officer.  
              The appellant argues that his sentence was demonstrably unfit for a first-time offender who entered guilty pleas, completed rehabilitative programs and had relevant Gladue factors.  He further argues that the sentencing judge failed to give appropriate weight to mitigating factors and imposed a jail sentence that was longer than necessary considering the circumstances of the offences and the offender.
              The Crown respondent acknowledges the sentence imposed was a “heavy one” but maintains that the trial judge made no error in principle, nor is the sentence demonstrably unfit.
              For the reasons that follow, the appeal is allowed.
    II.            Background
              In early 2020, the appellant’s relationship with his common law partner ended in criminal charges being laid against the appellant (the “2020 charges”) predating these matters.  The two have a child together whom the appellant has not seen since that time as an emergency protection order against the appellant was put into place following the 2020 charges. The appellant began using cocaine following the order and continued to do so until his arrest on these offences more than year later.   His former partner now has a new boyfriend and the two have a child together.
              In March 2021, the appellant posted disparaging comments about his former partner and the investigating officer on his other charges on the “Father’s Rights Alberta” Facebook page.  The messages were seen by Lurleen Hilliard, who messaged the appellant directly about the consequences of such posts.  The appellant then sent the following message to Ms Hilliard about his former partner, her new boyfriend, their child and Detective Horchuk of the Edmonton Police Service:
I'm not the same person anymore. I have become dark and hateful and murderous with revenge. I plan every day how to kill them both and take their baby from them. That bitch of a cop Steve Horchuk, too. He let my ex wait a whole week to get a sex kit done so I'm planning to get him or his family, the people he loves like he did to me. I'm going to prison so I'm going to become the most evil, nasty thing these people wanted to create. I'm going to either take my own life or I take theirs. It's quite simple in my eyes. I have already accepted I will never see my [child] again so I am going out a hero before I turn into a villain. I'm sorry, I understand your wanting to help but I have no intentions of going to Court or prison. I'm going to do what my spirit is telling me is right and then I'm going to either take my own life or theirs. The system did this to me. Made me insane. Yeah, I realize nothing I do will help me. She won. So I am going out loud before I go out.
              Ms Hilliard immediately contacted police about the threats and the appellant was arrested within a matter of hours.  The appellant admitted to police that he sent the threatening messages but said he would not have followed through with them.  A search of the appellant’s phone revealed additional communications in the weeks leading up to his arrest, in which similar threats were made about killing his former partner and her boyfriend and taking their baby.
              The appellant ultimately entered guilty pleas on the date set for trial and a Gladue report was prepared. It provided that the appellant was adopted as an infant and raised in Maskwacis near Wetaskiwin by friends of his biological mother whom he has met only recently.  His biological father is a Mohawk man from Ontario unknown to the appellant.  The appellant’s adopted mother and her family attended residential school where they endured abuse; that physical and mental abuse was passed on to the appellant by his mother during his upbringing.  The appellant was also sexually abused by his foster sisters over a number of years when he was child.  His father’s family did not approve of the appellant’s adoption because he was “white”, which created tensions in the family and eventually the appellant stopped attending family gatherings.  More recently, the appellant has been diagnosed with Borderline Personality Disorder, anti-social behaviour, and has issues with post- traumatic stress and insomnia. The appellant has struggled with suicidal thoughts, and attempted suicide twice in 2020 and early 2021; it remains difficult not being able to see his child.  
              The appellant was 31 at the time of sentencing and had no prior criminal record.  The sentencing court also heard that while in remand, the appellant completed courses on parenting, anger management and release planning through Norquest College, various programs though New Life Ministries, and was released on bail and successfully completed a 56-day residential treatment program.  At the time of sentencing, he was gainfully employed in the community.
          A victim impact statement from Detective Horchuk was entered before the court describing the impact of the offence on his family including his youngest child who has required therapy and medication to cope with anxiety.  The officer had to install a security system, fencing and carried a weapon off-duty.  While the Crown originally sought a one-year jail term, followed by two years’ probation, counsel subsequently increased its submission to a minimum of 18 months’ incarceration citing the seriousness of the offences and the impact on the officer’s young child.  Defence counsel, noting the appellant had spent approximately 4.5 months in custody pre-sentence, sought a disposition of time served followed 12 to 18 months’ probation.  
          In oral reasons, the sentencing judge imposed a global sentence of 18 months (nine months consecutive on each charge), reduced by 211 days for time served, and two years probation.  She found the sentence was in line with the various cases she reviewed.  Further, while noting various mitigating factors, she found that the appellant’s moral culpability remained high, and cited the following aggravating factors:
. . . the prolonged nature of the threats; the fact that they were reduced to writing; the multiple individuals who were threatened by Mr. Crier; the threats were not just to cause bodily harm but to kill; the threats included references to children and family of the complainants; the accused was on release at the time of the threats for serious allegations against one of the complainants; Mr. Crier ignored the attempt by Ms. Hilliard to deescalate the situation; the accused wrote the messages containing the threats to more than one person, not just to Ms. Hilliard, but also at least one other third party; one of the messages refers to not wanting to say too much on the phone, which increases the apparent seriousness of the threats; the threats included threats against a former domestic partner; the threats included threats against a police detective for simply fulfilling his role and his duty in the justice system as a police officer; the threats included an understanding that carrying out the threats would attract a lengthy gaol term and a stated willingness to embrace that gaol term; and the threats have had a long lasting impact on Detective Horchuk's life and an especially severe impact on the psychological wellbeing of his youngest child.
 III.            Issues on appeal
          The appellant argues that the sentence was demonstrably unfit and failed to meet parity principles.  He further maintains that the sentencing judge failed to give adequate weight to his Gladue and other mitigating factors.  The Crown submits that while the sentence was high, it was fit and sufficient weight was given to all relevant factors; it argues deference is owed to the sentencing judge’s decision.  
          The Crown consented to bail pending appeal, and reasonably conceded that should this Court find a sentencing error, it does not seek the appellant’s reincarceration on these offences.
 IV.            Analysis
          As recently reiterated in R v Friesen, 2020 SCC 9 at paras 25-26, 444 DLR (4th) 1, deference is owed to a sentencing decision unless a sentence is demonstrably unfit, or the sentencing judge made an error in principle that had an impact on sentence.
. . . Errors in principle include an error of law, a failure to consider a relevant factor, or erroneous consideration of an aggravating or mitigating factor. The weighing or balancing of factors can form an error in principle “[o]nly if by emphasizing one factor or by not giving enough weight to another, the trial judge exercises his or her discretion unreasonably” (R. v. McKnight (1999), 1999 CanLII 3717 (ON CA), 135 C.C.C. (3d) 41 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 35, cited in Lacasse, at para. 49). Not every error in principle is material: an appellate court can only intervene if it is apparent from the trial judge’s reasons that the error had an impact on the sentence (Lacasse, at para. 44). If an error in principle had no impact on the sentence, that is the end of the error in principle analysis and appellate intervention is justified only if the sentence is demonstrably unfit.
          In our view, the trial judge committed errors of principle which had an impact on sentence and justify appellate intervention.
          First, insufficient weight was given to this relatively young, first-time offender’s guilty plea, nor was there any reference to the appellant’s various expressions of remorse.  While the guilty plea was not at an early stage in the process, it spared the appellant’s former domestic partner and the police officer from testifying and thereby brought some measure of closure to their victimization. 
          Second, while the sentencing judge cited from the Gladue report and was aware of its content, we are satisfied that the impact of the appellant’s uncontested Gladue factors were not properly reflected in her finding related to his moral blameworthiness.  The appellant was raised in a cycle of intergenerational trauma, coupled with the actual physical, sexual, and emotional abuse he reported suffering during childhood. The appellant’s background was one of displacement and abandonment which speak to why, when similar intrafamilial issues arose with the breakdown of the appellant’s common law relationship and the forced separation from his child, he spiraled into addiction and attempted suicide; his sense of desperation was clearly manifested in the anger and threats seen in his posts and writing.
          While such threats can never be condoned, we see a strong correlation between the constellation of classic Gladue factors and the antisocial, impulsive and immature method by which the appellant chose to express his feelings.  His diminished moral culpability in this regard was not recognized by the sentencing judge, nor reflected in the 18-month sentence imposed.  
          As this Court stated in R v Swampy, 2017 ABCA 134, at paras 25-26:
… [T]he central purpose of the Gladue analysis is to achieve proportionality. The first principle that a sentence must be proportional to the gravity of the offence and degree of responsibility of the offender has “…long been the central tenet of the sentencing process”: Ipeelee at para 36. The “constrained circumstances of Aboriginal offenders may diminish their moral culpability”, as explained in Ipeelee at para 73. Reduced moral culpability must also affect the proportionality analysis, since moral culpability is one component of the equation. It follows that where there is reduced moral culpability, there is a consequential reductive effect upon the ultimate determination of a fit and proper sentence: Ipeelee at para 87.
It is an error to proceed on the basis that Gladue factors do or do not justify departure from a proportionate sentence . . .   Instead, application of the Gladue analysis achieves a proportionate sentence.
          Similarly, the appellant’s genuine efforts towards rehabilitation, particularly his sustained and hard work since the offences to address the abuse he suffered as a child and to manage his anger and addictions, are not reflected in the sentence imposed.  Rather, in our view, the “crushing” effect of the sentence imposed is inconsistent with the efforts of this first-time offender and, if anything, risked derailment of the significant progress the appellant has made.  
          Restraint ought to have weighed heavily in this matter; yet, the sentence imposed was far from the least restrictive, particularly in respect of the circumstances of this Indigenous appellant: ss 718.2(d) and (e) of the Criminal Code.  Further, while the sentencing judge determined that the appellant’s 10-month sentence in respect of each offence ought to be reduced by one month each to account for totality, the consecutive sentences imposed were nevertheless “unduly long or harsh”: s 718.2(c) of the Criminal Code. Further, to the extent that the sentencing judge relied on post-trial sentencing decisions where the offender had a record for violence or committed other offences concurrently, these cases had little precedential value and did not substantively assist in arriving at a fit and proportionate sentence in this case.
          Finally, while we recognize that the weighing of relevant factors is within the purview of the sentencing judge, we conclude the sentencing judge overemphasized various aggravating factors in arriving at the lengthy sentence imposed.  For example, the characterization of this offence as “prolonged” was questionable and the fact that there were multiple complainants was already accounted for in the appellant’s guilty plea to more than one offence.  Where various factors were found aggravating, insufficient weight was given to this young appellant’s guilty pleas, prevalent Gladue factors, and his commendable post-offence rehabilitation efforts.
          In sum, we conclude that over and under-emphasis of relevant factors amounted to an error in principle which had a material impact on the sentence imposed and led to a disproportionate and unfit sentence. 
    V.            Conclusion
          The appeal is allowed. The appellant’s sentence is amended to six months consecutive on each offence, for a global sentence of one year.  There is to be no variation of the collateral orders.
 
 
          Given the Crown’s concession, and our view that the interests of justice are not served by ordering the appellant’s return to custody, there will be no order for the appellant’s surrender into custody.  The amended sentence is stayed.
