./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/ca/2023abca10.html
              The appellant appeals his convictions by a jury of 1 count each of sexual interference, invitation to sexual touching, and sexual assault in relation to the complainant, who was between 12 and 13 years of age at the time the incidents occurred. The sexual assault count was stayed pursuant to R v Kienapple, 1974 CanLII 14 (SCC), 1 SCR 729. 
              The complainant had attended an all-boys school near Genesee, Alberta in 1993-94, at 12-13 years of age. Corporal punishment was an important part of the school’s “philosophy”. The appellant was a teacher and “duty master” responsible for supervising the boys and inflicting corporal punishment on them. The complainant alleged that the appellant engaged in several sexual acts, mainly in the office where the corporal punishment was meted out, with two acts occurring outdoors.
               The Crown’s theory of the case was that the complainant was an outcast who was bullied at the school by the other students, and because of this, was targeted by the appellant. The Crown further alleged that by virtue of his role at the school, the appellant had opportunities to sexually touch the complainant while he was administering corporal punishment in the duty master’s room. 
              The appellant testified, denying the allegations.
              The appellant submits that there were several errors of law that occurred during his trial, which led to convictions that are a miscarriage of justice. He submits that the trial judge erred in not disclosing the complainant’s therapeutic records, in allowing improper cross-examination of the appellant, and in giving jury instructions which led to convictions that could not be otherwise supported by the evidence at trial.
              We are not persuaded the alleged errors undermined the verdict. The appeal is dismissed.
    II.            Facts
              The parties agree for the most part regarding the underlying facts, which were summarized in the appellant’s factum at paragraphs 3-11. To the extent that additional facts bear on the various grounds of appeal, those have been further highlighted below.
              The complainant was one of about 10 to 20 grade 7 students living at the school during the 1993 – 1994 school year. The school encouraged a consistent routine with its students, who were expected to assist with chores outside of class time. The curriculum focused on academic excellence and encouraged outdoor activities, such as canoeing, snowshoeing, and running. The school also employed a strict disciplinary regime, which included running outdoors, performing additional chores, and being swatted, for violations of the student code of conduct. “Swatting” was the term the school used for “spanking”. All parents and students were made aware of the corporal punishment policy before the students attended the school and signed a contract agreeing to that effect.
              The school had a “duty master,” who was a male teacher or staff member in charge of supervising the students overnight in the dorms. The duty master would be a different staff member each night, and this staff member would be expected to sleep in the assigned duty master’s room at night, which was the same room where all swatting punishments were administered by staff. During the day, there would be two “duty masters” scheduled to fulfill this role.
          The complainant testified to approximately 10 to 12 incidents of sexual activity with the appellant during the 1993 – 1994 school year and emphasized that these incidents were always in the duty master’s room, with only two exceptions. The complainant testified that the incidents of sexual touching occurred after being spanked by the appellant in the duty master’s room. The discipline would often occur during dinner or “less likely” during work period. There was one incident, which the complainant indicated was towards the end of the school year, where the appellant and the complainant engaged in mutual masturbation in the woods by the school. The complainant also testified to one instance of oral sex, which was the last incident of sexual contact, occurring near the end of year by the woods near the river.
          The complainant filed a police report regarding these incidents in February 2017 and was interviewed once, on February 23, 2017. In the interview, the complainant noted that around the year 2000, the complainant started disclosing the incidents “publicly” to their therapist at the time. The complainant later provided information to the police about receiving cognitive behavioral therapy at a clinic in 2017 and electroconvulsive therapy through another clinic in 2016. The complainant also disclosed that the incidents had been discussed with a therapist between 1997 and 1999.
          In 2019, the complainant also wrote an article that was published in an online magazine, discussing the experience of receiving funding through a victims’ services fund that the complainant had applied for in June 2017. In this article, the complainant wrote that the complainant was referred to the victim’s fund through trauma therapy group facilitators, who suggested that the complainant apply. The complainant’s initial application was denied, and as the article recounts, the complainant then asked a family doctor to write a letter about the effects of the complainant’s experience at the school. The complainant noted that this subsequent letter was “strong enough” to win the victim service’s fund appeal.
          The defence sought production of the complainant’s injury funding application to the Victims of Crime Compensation Board and the summary of the police investigation that formed part of the injury application. The trial judge concluded those records were “relevant” and ordered production under s 278.7 of the Criminal Code. 
          Th defence also sought production of the complainant’s therapeutic records under ss 278.3 and 278.5. Access to those records was denied. The trial judge concluded the statutory conditions for ordering production were not present, stating:
The -- I stress that the file itself, other than the two documents that I've said I will release to the accused, really all relate to why it took [the complainant] as long as it did … to make this application. There is nothing in any of the materials that, in my view, it would be in interests of justice to release to the accused. Quite the opposite. My -- one of my main concerns is that there is -- the release of this information would be based on a discriminatory belief; that is, that a complainant with mental health issues lacks credibility, is unreliable, and is less likely to have been a victim of a sexual offence.
I'm also concerned, as I was on the other application -- and I mentioned it in my decision -- that I want to protect society's interest in encouraging the reporting of sexual offences and obtaining of treatment and that I am concerned about when you're dealing with a complainant that has any kind of mental health issues, they -- that these are some of the more vulnerable people in our society. I am concerned that releasing these documents is offensive to the concept of protecting society's interest in encouraging the reporting of sexual offences and obtaining treatment. I find that there will be a little risk to the integrity of the trial process if I, (a), release these two records to the accused and, (b), do not release the balance of the records. (emphasis added)
 III.            Grounds of Appeal
          The appellant advances three grounds of appeal:
1)      The trial judge erred in law by denying disclosure of the complainant’s therapeutic records for the Court’s review under section 278.5(1) of the Criminal Code, RSC 1985, c C-46.
2)      The trial judge erred in law by allowing the appellant to be cross examined in an unfair manner that reversed the burden of proof, contrary to this Court’s direction in R v Kusk, 1999 ABCA 49, 232 AR 270.
3)      The trial judge erred in her instructions regarding the overlap between the three counts, and how the jury must approach its verdict as between counts.
 IV.            Analysis
Ground 1: The trial judge erred in law by denying disclosure of the complainant’s therapeutic records for the Court’s review under section 278.5(1) of the Criminal Code.
          The appellant argues the trial judge erred by denying his application to produce the therapeutic records because “the trial judge failed to undertake any individualized consideration of each requested record and imposed a higher standard than required to assess ‘likely relevance’ and ‘interest of justice’ at the stage one hearing”. The appellant does not argue that the “mere fact of receiving therapy nor the nature and extent of that therapy is relevant”, but effectively proposes that as long as an argument can be made that there might be something relevant in the interaction between the complainant and any therapist, the trial judge must conduct a preliminary examination of all such available records and assess “likely relevance” and “interest of justice” at the stage one hearing, contrary to what is outlined in section 278.5(1) CCC and in R v Mills, 1999 CanLII 637 (SCC), 3 SCR 668.
          Specifically, the appellant argues “that: (i) any statements made by the complainant about the allegations during therapy were made with a much fresher memory than their police statement or trial testimony; and (ii) the timing of the therapy in relation to disclosure to police raises serious questions about the influence of the former on the latter”: [AF para 19]. The appellant refers to complainant’s testimony that the complainant “discussed the incidents with a therapist as early as 1997, four years after they allegedly occurred. They again discussed the incidents with a therapist in 2000, seven years after the fact. The first time they disclosed the incidents in a manner not protected by the Criminal Code regime was in their police interview in 2017, 23 years after the alleged incidents”: [AF para 20]. The argument then concludes that those circumstances “should have raised some uncertainty as to whether production of the records to the judge was necessary”.
          Similarly, the appellant also suggests that an evidential basis exists for judicial exploration because the complainant:
also received interventions such as cognitive behavioral and electroconvulsive therapies only months before providing their statement to police. At the very least, these records should have been produced so the trial judge could have determined whether they contained any information necessary for the Appellant to make full answer and defence. [AF para 24]
          On its face, all of the foregoing comes down to an argument that a trial judge should have conducted an investigation of any records that might conceivably report some aspects of conversations involving the complainant and one or more therapists over perhaps 20 years in order to see if there is something useful to the defence. This is a reversion to reasoning rejected by Parliament and by the common law before that.
          Proper interpretation and application of the relevant provisions of the Criminal Code requires the Court to be mindful of Parliament’s purposes which are common to s 276 and to the set of provisions being s 278.1 to s. 278.91 of the Criminal Code. Those shared purposes include (a) the protection of the integrity of a trial by excluding irrelevant and misleading evidence and by preventing distortive and distracting satellite litigation inside trials, (b) the protection of the accused's right to a fair trial, and (c) the protection of the security and privacy of complainants. These purposes are noted in cases related to s 278: see eg R v Darrach, 2000 SCC 46 at paras 19-31, 2 SCR 443; R v Barton, 2019 SCC 33 at para 74, 2 SCR 579; see also R v Goldfinch, 2019 SCC 38 at paras 28-38, 3 SCR 3; R v RV, 2019 SCC 41 at paras 32-46, 3 SCR 237. They are also noted in cases related to ss 278.1 to s 279.91: see eg R v Mills, 1999 CanLII 637 (SCC), 3 SCR 668 and R v JJ, 2022 SCC 28 at paras 57-60, paras 113-122, paras 127-133, 471 DLR (4th) 577.
          Proper interpretation and application of these provisions also requires the Court to be mindful of the foundational evidence rule of relevance, of the long-standing restrictions of the collateral evidence rule, and of the basic principles of disclosure of third party records as described in World Bank Group v Wallace, 2016 SCC 15 at para 113, 1 SCR 207 which underscores that – even in cases which do not have the protective features of the relevant Code provisions here – before a judge is required to assess third party records, the applicant “must demonstrate” that the records sought are “likely relevant”: see also R v Pascal, 2020 ONCA 287 at paras 30-31, 387 CCC (3rd) 236, leave denied SCCA No. 214 (QL) (SCC No. 39243).
          To be relevant, the claimant must demonstrate “a reasonable possibility that the information is logically probative to an issue at trial”: R v McNeil, 2009 SCC 3 at para 17, 1 SCR 66. A claimant for disclosure of third-party records must meet this hurdle in any case whether or not the relevant Code provisions here are applicable. Then, as also pointed out in McNeil at para 21, Parliament has established a further (constitutionally valid) process for balancing whether to force disclosure of “records containing personal information of complainants and witnesses in proceedings for sexual offences under ss. 278.1 to 278.91 of the Criminal Code”. It follows that, at the very least, a claimant for disclosure of records that might contain reports or notations of conversations must do more than assert the bare possibility of statements existing within any conversations about the events under consideration being contained in records of this kind to call upon the trial judge to conduct a standardless sweep of such records on behalf of the defence.
          An accused person is entitled to a fair trial, not to the most forensically advantageous trial imaginable. Put another way, as in R v Rose, 1998 CanLII 768 (SCC), 3 SCR 262 at para 99:
. . . the right to make full answer and defence does not imply an entitlement to those rules and procedures most likely to result in a finding of innocence. Rather, the right entitles the accused to rules and procedures which are fair in the manner in which they enable the accused to defend against and answer the Crown’s case. [Emphasis added]
          Parliament has recognized that the criminal justice system was quite able to inflict additional damage on victims of sex crimes and to operate in a manner which deterred them from disclosing what happened to them. Further, even as respected a source as the eminent scholar John Wigmore had the following attributed to him as reported in the 1970 version of Evidence in Trials at Common Law, Vol 3A (Chadbourn rev 1970) at para 736:
Modern psychiatrists have amply studied the behaviour of errant young girls and women before coming before the courts in all sorts of cases. Their psychic complexes are multifarious, distorted partly by their inherent defects, partly by diseased derangements or abnormal instincts, partly by bad social environment, partly by temporary physiological or emotional conditions. One form taken by these complexes is that of contriving false charges of sexual offenses by men.
          To properly situate what Wigmore said, he wrote the above passage in 1939, but that attitude had not been improved by Chadbourn by 1970. Wigmore grounded his analysis on what was characterized as a “realist movement” which removed the “veil or romance which enveloped all womanhood” and was reflected in a large mass of cases and articles arguing that “[n]o judge should ever let a sex offence charge go to the jury unless the female complainant’s social history and mental makeup have been examined and testified to by a qualified physician.”: see p 737, para 924a of Evidence in Trials at Common Law, Vol 3A. 
          This is now facially recognizable as an astonishingly wrong-headed opinion: see A. Wakeling Corroboration in Canadian Law, (Toronto: The Carswell Company Limited, 1977) at p 116 (“Wigmore’s views of the character of women seem incredible in the twentieth century. … The presumption that charges are fabricated must be eradicated”). It is noteworthy that the requirement in what was then s 142 of the Criminal Code for juries to be instructed to look for corroboration of the testimony of women who complained of rape because it was “not safe to find the accused guilty in the absence of such corroboration” was not repealed until the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1975, S.C. 1974-75-76, c. 93 which came into effect in March of 1976. And, even then, corroboration continued to be a requirement for a variety of sexual offences. Moreover, the law of criminal evidence until 1983 still assumed that a truthful victim of rape would make a ‘recent complaint’ of the event – hence contributing to debate about the concept of ‘recent complaint’ into the 1980s: see eg R v Timm, 1981 CanLII 207 (SCC), 2 SCR 315.
          The upshot of all this was that what Wigmore was reporting was a seeming consensus, not a personal view. Both victims and the administration of justice suffered gravely from this sort of thinking. It has also been noted that in those years there was also a further phenomenon of the doubt of trauma and pain experienced by all adolescent or child victims of sexual abuse of whatever gender in a society which, in the past, tended to disbelieve or disregard their plight even if they did disclose the abuse: see the contextual discussion by L’Heureux-Dube J for the majority in R v L(DO), 1993 CanLII 46 (SCC), 4 SCR 419, SCJ No 72 (QL) at paras 27-36 (QL) concerning how the legal system had long re-victimized and placed barriers and disincentives in the path, particularly, of children in relation to disclosure of their abuse.
          Seen in light of the foregoing, the appellant’s position is out of step with the purposes and content of the Code provisions. It does not even fit modern concepts related to Crown disclosure more generally. The appellant suggests that the first stage of s 278.1 to s 278.91 of the Criminal Code requires judicial detective work. He argues that what the complainant might have said to any therapist or contact about the circumstances of the alleged offence at that time is “likely relevant to the reliability of the testimony, not the fact that therapy was sought or obtained”. 
          This is an ipse dixit, not evidence, let alone compelling evidence. The appellant denies that his motion amounted to a fishing expedition or “a case of stereotypical speculation”. His position is that the trial judge was required to preview any available specific documents and determine if there is anything there that is “likely relevant” to the credibility or reliability of the complainant’s report. The argument seems to go on to contend that the production “is necessary in the interests of justice”. It would not, on that theory, matter if there happened to be thousands of pages of records for the judge to ferret through.
          Put another way, the appellant suggests that the trial judge should conduct a preliminary investigation of the possibility that the complainant may have said different things to different people at different times under different circumstances about different aspects of what happened to the complainant. A court should appreciate that whether there seem to be ‘differences’ in what is reported in the records (let alone what was actually said at the time before the records were made) would not be the same as ‘inconsistencies’ and that whether there are ‘inconsistencies’ would not be the same as ‘contradictions’ or, as in the appellant’s alternative submission, ‘planted’ notions or memories.
          We should be realistic. What any person might happen to say about such an intensely private experience would be entirely dependent upon who the person is speaking to and to the context in which they are speaking. The precision of the record, where the complainant did not subsequently authenticate the record after it was made, would necessitate further assessment of the attentiveness, the accuracy or the completeness of the recorder. 
          As Clement JA for this Court pointed out in R v Cherpak (1978), 1978 ALTASCAD 171 (CanLII), 42 CCC (2d) 166, leave denied (1978) 42 CCC (2d) 166 (SCC), about whether a police report is a statement of a complainant: “it is plain from the record that the report of itself is not a statement made by the complainant and reduced to writing. It was composed by the officer from notes he had made, which prima facie do not purport to be a full and fair record of any statement given by the complainant. Nor does it appear that the report necessarily followed the text of the notes.” The decision in Cherpak itself has in key respects been swept into history but this observation about whether notes of others amount to statements of persons mentioned in them remains intact: see eg R v Moore, 2003 ABCA 163 at para 13, 17 Alta LR (4th) 29 applying Cherpak to medical records.
          Ultimately, the putative logic of a syllogism that “if the complainant did not mention event XX to therapist A, then XX did not happen” or of a syllogism that “if the complainant describes event XX with some particulars, then other particulars did not happen” both depend upon an unstated premise; namely, that if the complainant mentioned event XX or described event XX the complainant should be expected to have included sufficient particularity and precision to conform with more recent testimony. Either way the syllogism would ‘work’, the unstated premise is heavily loaded with stereotypical thinking in sexual assault cases. 
          More broadly, a researching trial judge would be in no position to presume such a premise to be made out for any specific alleged utterance or gist. Any ability to interpret the events of the communications between the persons involved would require considerable evidential exploration and elaboration. The trial judge should not be expected to conduct numerous in camera collateral minitrials during a preliminary review of therapeutic records searching for inconsistencies to be then assessed through such multiple levels of scrutiny.
          In the end, an accused seeking production of a complainant’s therapeutic records must do more than assert that records exist. An order for production requires “case-specific evidence or information to show that the record in issue is likely relevant to an issue at trial or the competence of a witness to testify and that the production be “in the interests of justice”: Mills at para 120. 
          Moreover, the “mere fact that a complainant’s reporting ... is not a verbatim recitation or is revealed in a piecemeal fashion is not in and of itself the conduit to infer negatively on a complainant’s credibility”: R v Garford, 2021 ABCA 338 at paras 20-22, 33 Alta. LR (7th) 1. As this Court said in Garford, 
Disclosure may well be a progressive exercise. The pain or trauma inherent in most decisions to disclose can be painful for victims. It is therefore not surprising that it may take some complainants more than one occasion to shed this burden and reveal the full picture.
Therapeutic intervention is likely to involve precisely that phenomenon.
          In R v Waterman, 2021 SCC 5, at para 2, 453 DLR (4th) 583 reversing 2020 NLCA 18 (CanLII), 2020 NCLA 18, 453 DLR (4th) 586, Moldaver J noted that the “complainant explained that counselling had helped improve his memory since his initial police statement. In the majority's view, it was for the jury to decide whether this explanation neutralized any reasonable doubt caused by the inconsistencies.” Moldaver J added that the Supreme Court declined “to second guess this determination”.
          The appellant forcefully argues that balancing the complainant’s privacy interests in therapeutic records should be performed only at the second stage, where only the trial judge will examine the records to determine if they meet the statutory requirements for production to an accused.
          In our view, the trial judge correctly included the complainant’s privacy interests in the first stage of assessing “likely relevance”. The Supreme Court of Canada in R v McNeil 2009 SCC 3 at paras 30-32, described the “likely relevance” threshold applicable as different from the “likely relevance” threshold applicable to third-party records generally defined in R v O’Connor, 1995 CanLII 51 (SCC), 4 SCR 411.
          The balancing exercise mandated by the Code is a qualitative one, and to an extent a normative one, and is not a matter of formalism or box-checking. Courts have long insisted on substance over form and that the law resists the idea of talismanic incantations that are dispositive in the law: R v Laberge, 2022 ABCA 385 at para 52, AJ No 1425 (QL), referring to R v W(D), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), 1 SCR 742.
          The decision to refuse to order the production of a therapeutic record pursuant to s 278.5(1) of the Criminal Code is a question of law: s 278.91, Criminal Code. Nonetheless, there is an element of deference as to the factual context and exercise of discretion. The trial judge correctly identified and applied the law when she refused production of the therapeutic records for the court’s inspection.
          The request for the therapeutic records was based simply on the hope that the complainant during therapy might have said something that might assist the defence relating to credibility or reliability of present evidence. Allowing disclosure without some reasonable basis would defeat the statutory process established in s 278.5.
          This ground of appeal must be dismissed.
Ground 2: The trial judge erred in law by allowing the appellant to be cross examined in an unfair manner that reversed the burden of proof, contrary to this Court’s direction in R v Kusk.
          This ground suggests that questioning of the appellant about his own version[s] of his interactions with the complainant or the visibility into the room where most of the alleged assaults occurred or both involved the concept in Kusk. It should be noted that the appellant at various points in his testimony conceded limits to his memory and that his answers to Crown counsel’s questions were based on “what I would have likely done” and “I'm certain based upon my character as how I would have conducted myself” and to one question “an assumption based on my previous recollections and practice”. The appellant also asserted that he had no independent memory of being alone in the duty master room “but I have independent memory of never being alone and doing anything sexually untoward with him”.
          The essence of Kusk is that “[i]t is improper to suggest that an accused must explain why a witness would make a complaint”. It is a principle that has been affirmed by this Court on several occasions: see eg R v Hilton, 2016 ABCA 397 at para 62, 343 CCC (3d) 304 at para 62; R v MJB, 2012 ABCA 119 at paras 51-52, 285 CCC (3d) 463. But M(JB) at para 32 explained that the fairness concern relates to the fact that “the Crown is not entitled to cross-examine an accused on the veracity of Crown witnesses or invite comment from the accused about a (the) witness's possible motive to lie”. This concern about fairness and burden shifting dates to R v Markadonis, 1935 CanLII 44 (SCC), SCR 657 and even further back to R v Baldwin, 18 Cr App R 175 (CA). Kusk was also a situation where Crown counsel followed up the impugned questions with an impassioned argument that there was no motive for the complainant to lie in her evidence and for her to go through the agonies of the court process.
          The case at bar is not a Kusk situation with respect to the cross-examination of the appellant or with respect to Crown counsel’s jury address. In the parts suggested by the appellant to be improper, Crown counsel merely, and not at any particular length, homed in on what the appellant remembered or did not remember. There was nothing illegitimate about the questions, and the appellant was quite able to offer answers tinged with confidence.
          The appellant argues that the Crown focused on the appellant’s memory and urged the jury to conclude that the appellant’s lack of specific memory and inability to provide an explanation meant that the appellant had not established his innocence. The appellant argues that in doing this, the Crown prosecutor subtly but effectively shifted the burden of proof. 
          It should be noted that the charge to the jury repeatedly reinforced the entitlement of the appellant to an acquittal if the Crown failed to prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Whatever might be said of Crown counsel’s submissions to the jury, as hereinafter discussed, the law assumes that the jury understands and complies with instructions on the law from the trial judge: see eg R v Griffin, 2009 SCC 28 at para 72, 2 SCR 42 (“juries must be trusted to have the requisite intelligence to perform their duties in accordance with the instructions given to them by the trial judge”); R v Barton, 2019 SCC 33 at para 177 (“Juries although expected to apply common sense, are above all expected to follow the instructions given by the trial judge.”); R v Khill, 2021 SCC 37 at para 116, 409 CCC (3d) 141, citing R v Corbett, 1988 CanLII 80 (SCC), 1 SCR 670 at pp 692-693:
The jury is, of course, bound to follow the law as it is explained by the trial judge. Jury directions are often long and difficult, but the experience of trial judges is that juries do perform their duty according to the law. We should regard with grave suspicion arguments which assert that depriving the jury of all relevant information is preferable to giving them everything, with a careful explanation as to any limitations on the use to which they may put that information. . . .
It is of course, entirely possible to construct an argument disputing the theory of trial by jury. . . . But until the paradigm is altered by Parliament, the Court should not be heard to call into question the capacity of juries to do the job assigned to them. [Emphasis added]
          A fortiori is that assumption about juror respect for the law and their instructions about it even more valid where the specific instructions are described by the trial judge as fundamental to their task and to their duty – as are the instructions as to recognizing and applying the burden of proof – when that point is repeatedly made clear to the jury. 
          This ground of appeal argues that Crown counsel’s questioning and submissions set the jury irrecoverably off course. That is not always the case even when the Crown conduct is improper. The Court in R v Hayles-Wilson, 2022 ONCA 790 at p 38, OJ No 5035 (QL) found it relevant that the jury was directed properly on burden of proof, even though the same Court felt the trial judge ought to have given a corrective instruction about Crown comments that the appellant tailored his evidence to Crown disclosure and that he had a motive to lie. The Court in Hayles-Wilson affirmed the accused’s conviction for first degree murder.
          The appellant selects one comment in the Crown’s closing submission: 
Paul Sheppard had no memory of [the complainant] ever being in the duty master’s room. I’d suggest a convenient answer. No memory then of sexually assaulting [the complainant] either. Doesn’t mean it didn’t happen, members of the jury.
          The cumulative effect he argues, then, is that the burden of proof shifted and created a significant risk that the jury would find the appellant guilty despite the existence of a reasonable doubt. We are not persuaded by this hypothesis. To begin, Crown Counsel clearly deferred to the jury, saying at the start:
I have a very brief summary of my theory of the case, and it is as follows. And this is based on my interpretation of the evidence, and once again you are the triers of fact.
The address of Crown counsel referred on occasion to aspects of the answers given by the appellant as to which Crown counsel’s submissions invited the jury to conclude that specific answers by the appellant should be considered untruthful:
I would suggest Paul Sheppard’s evidence was vague, at times illogical, stretched the truth to try and fit within the narrative that they're trying to give to you. Wet hair, could see around the blinds, who would come in through that door, the email compliment even though the lines are clear that it was not a compliment. I would suggest that you cannot rely on that testimony.
          It is not obvious what of this was inflammatory or excessive to the point of denying the appellant a fair trial. It was argument. After Crown counsel’s address concluded, there was a recess until 2:30 pm. After the recess, both counsel returned, and defence counsel expressed no concern about Crown counsel’s questioning or submissions, and instead went through elements of the charge to the jury as drafted [AT 658-667]. 
          As also noted in reference to ground three below, failure to raise an objection to a jury charge to seek any ‘correction’ is a factor in determining whether the concern raised on appeal had significance at the trial. Here, failure to object and press for correction is important because the ability of the trial judge to take any necessary and sufficient remedial measures is distinctly impaired: compare R v Rose, 1998 CanLII 768 (SCC), 3 SCR 262 at paras 124-137. Trial judges are not expected to be clairvoyant about what is largely a matter of argument by opposing counsel that the other counsel might consider to be objectionable. 
          If defence counsel was of the view that something as crucial as burden and standard of proof had been reversed by what Crown counsel did, one might have expected counsel to make a point of it: see eg R v Harvey, (1996) 1996 CanLII 3088 (BC CA), 109 CCC (3d) 108 at para (which involved an improper smear of defence counsel but the Court found no miscarriage of justice); R v Atkinson (1994), 149 AR 199 at para 29; R v Mack, 2012 ABCA 42 at paras 57-59, 522 AR 262, appeal dismissed 2014 SCC 58, 3 SCR 3; R v Clyke, 2021 ONCA 810 at paras 32-37, and paras 43-44 (“While each case falls to be decided on its own facts, a non-exhaustive list of factors to be considered includes: (i) the seriousness of the improper comments; (ii) the context in which the comments were made; (iii) the presence or absence of objection by defence counsel; and (iv) any remedial steps taken by the trial judge following the address or in the final instructions to the jury ...” (emphasis added)). In Clyke, the litany of Crown counsel misconduct was blatantly improper and unfair and counsel “protested vigorously”. The trial judge’s attempt in Clyke to fix the situation fell short.
          Improper cross-examination by Crown counsel can take various broad forms, two of which were described in R v McKnight, 2022 ABCA 251 at para 121, 416 CCC (3d) 248 (under motion on SCC No 40375) referencing in R v Ahmed, 2015 ONCA 751 at paras 41-42 as follows:
The first category involves the way the Crown treats the accused during a cross-examination. The Crown cannot harass the accused, engage in sarcasm, seek to demean the accused, or punish the accused for invoking his or her constitutional rights: see R. v. R. (A.J.) (1994), 1994 CanLII 3447 (ON CA), 20 O.R. (3d) 405 (C.A.), at 412-13.
The second category of potentially improper cross-examination of an accused can be approached as an admissibility of evidence issue. It involves questions that have the potential to elicit answers that are improperly prejudicial to the accused.
          Other objectionable conduct arises where Crown effectively testifies or personally vouchsafes the validity of certain evidence, or when Crown counsel mis-states the law in a manner which trespasses on the trial judge’s role, or when Crown counsel directly impugns the conduct of defence counsel. None of those forms of abusive conduct exists here. 
          The appellant was not asked to explain why the complainant would lie and the Crown neither invited the jury to consider why the complainant would lie, nor suggested that it had proven that the complainant had no motive to lie. Rather, the record reflects simply that the appellant was put through a firm cross-examination whereby his inconsistencies in his memory of the events were examined. Crown counsel’s cross-examination did not cross the line from aggressive to abusive, prejudice the appellant in his defence, nor did he act so improperly as to ‘bring the administration of justice into disrepute”.
          Moreover, improper cross-examination or submissions by the Crown do not always require a new trial. To start with, the zone including conduct which is merely inappropriate or is seriously wrong or is so prejudicial that it deprives the accused of a fair trial is blurry and trial judges are in the atmosphere to respond if the line in that zone is crossed.
          The question is whether, first, the Crown conduct was improper, and second, whether any improprieties found resulted in a miscarriage of justice such that the curative proviso in s 686(1)(b)(iii) of the Criminal Code is inapplicable: McKnight at para 119, Fanjoy v The Queen, 1985 CanLII 53 (SCC), 2 SCR 233 at 240; R v Ruptash, 1982 ABCA 165 at para 16, 68 CCC (2d) 182; R v R (AJ) (1994), 1994 CanLII 3447 (ON CA), 94 CCC (3d) 168 at 176; R v AG, 2015 ONCA 159 at para 22, 319 CCC (3d) 441; R v Belcourt, 2019 BCCA 435 at para 48, 60 CR (7th) 151. Improper closing submissions are in the same legal position as cross-examination by the Crown: R v T(A), 2015 ONCA 65 at paras 29-31, 124 OR (3d) 161; R v Hong, 2019 ONCA 170 at para 33, OJ No 1148 (QL); R v Chacon-Perez, 2022 ONCA 3 at paras 129-146, 410 CCC (3d) 1.
          This ground of appeal cannot succeed and is rejected. 
Ground 3: The trial judge erred in her instructions regarding the overlap between the three counts, and how the jury must approach its verdict as between counts.
          Finally, the appellant takes issue with the following portion of the jury instructions:
There is overlap between counts 1 [sexual interference], 2 [invitation to sexual touching], and 3 [sexual assault]. Therefore, if you find the accused, Paul Sheppard, not guilty on counts 1 and 2, you cannot find him guilty on count 3. If you find the accused, Paul Sheppard, guilty on count 1 or count 2, you must find him guilty on count 3 as well.
(emphasis added, Trial Transcript, 690/25-28.)
          The appellant argues that the actus reus of the offence in count two (invitation to sexual touching) is satisfied by a communication and does not require actual touching. Whereas sexual assault requires proof that the appellant physically touched the complainant in sexual circumstances. As such, the appellant argues that it was an error to direct the jury to convict the appellant of count 3 (sexual assault) if it found the appellant guilty of count 2 (invitation to sexual touching only). The appellant says the jury charge may have confused the jury.
          The trial judge did not expressly say that the jury’s determination of guilt on counts 1 and 2 must be independent of one another but the jury charge itself separated each crime definition and made it clear what the differences in elements were [AT 683/33-690/23]. It was at the end of these very careful explanations and distinctions between the counts, their elements and the relevant evidence that the trial judge then made the challenged comments about “overlap”.
          Misdirection in a jury charge is an error of law: R v Barton, 2019 SCC 33, at para 54, 2 SCR 579. That said, a jury charge is generally reviewed on a standard of reasonableness for adequacy and fairness, not perfection: R v Jacquard, 1997 CanLII 374 (SCC), 1 SCR 314, para 2; R v Morningchild, 2011 ABCA 215, para 3, 275 CCC (3d) 565; R v Araya, 2015 SCC 11 at para 39, 1 SCR 581; R v Goforth, 2022 SCC 25 at paras 20-21, 415 CCC (3d) 1.
          A jury charge is to educate, not complicate the case, and "common sense and the law need not be strangers": R v Rodgerson, 2015 SCC 38, para 54, 2 SCR 760. In that regard, a reviewing court must take a functional approach to the assessment of a jury charge, asking whether the charge was sufficient to enable the jurors to decide the case according to the law and the evidence taken as a whole: Araya, 2015 SCC 11 at para 39. As stated in R v Cabrera, 2019 ABCA 184, paras 17-19, 442 DLR (4th) 368, affirmed 2019 SCC 56, 4 SCR 136: the review of jury instructions:
. . . requires properly, not perfectly, instructed juries. Thus, a jury charge is not subjected to minute scrutiny or held to a standard of perfection. As Martland J noted in R v Young: “There will probably never be a perfect charge or one that cloistered appellate counsel cannot find objectionable after minute scrutiny.”
Instead, in accordance with the functional and contextual approach, alleged errors must be examined in the context of the entire charge and trial as a whole. That includes addresses by counsel, how the parties treated issues at trial and counsel’s submissions as to the charges. A jury charge is not inadequate because more could have been said or what was said could have been better phrased. Allegations of non-direction are to be assessed contextually in light of the facts and circumstances of each particular case.
[Citations omitted.]
          As noted above, the trial judge told the jury that if it acquitted on counts 1 and 3, it must acquit on count 2. Saying so, arguably, might be unduly favorable to the defence in a different context with different evidence. The trial judge then went on to tell the jury that if the jury returned a verdict of guilty on either count 1 or 2, a guilty verdict on count 3 would follow. Defence counsel did not object to this. Rather defence counsel said about this passage: “You might add the sentence, This is for you to decide. But that should be obvious.”
          We agree with the Crown’s submission that, if there was error here, the 686(1)(b)(iii) of the Code curative proviso should apply. As exemplified in R v Samaniego, 2022 SCC 9, at paras 66-67, 412 CCC (3d) 7, the application of s 686(1)(b)(iii) of the Code can be topic by topic and it applies when there is harmless error on any topic: see also R v V(R), 2019 SCC 41 at para 85, 3 SCR 237; R v Khan, 2001 SCC 86 at para 28, 3 SCR 823; R v Settle, 2021 ABCA 221 at paras 48-76, 407 CCC (3d) 154 (single JA, cases cited); compare R v White, 2022 SCC 7 at paras 8-10, 411 CCC (3d) 419.
          The appellant argues that what the jury was told “led them to believe that a finding that he committed any one of the three offences was sufficient to ground liability for the other two”. Here, a guilty finding on count 1 for sexual interference was inevitably consistent with a guilty finding on count 3 for sexual assault. The pivotal issue was the inclusion of the words “or count 2” in the next sentence. This rendered the comment somewhat indistinct. But we are satisfied that, in the context of the whole charge, the jury would have understood that count 2 depended on a finding of invitation with intention and unlike the other two counts it did not turn on itself.
          The practical overlap in the counts is that the Crown’s case was that the appellant was guilty of all three counts, and the defence case was that the appellant was guilty of none of them. As for that practical overlap in the counts, the Crown submits:
31        It is true that, in a different case, it is theoretically possible that a jury might reach different verdicts on charges of invitation to sexual touching and sexual assault. But, in the context of this evidence and the way the case was argued (all or nothing), that theoretical possibility is so abstract as to be meaningless. This jury was instructed as counsel approved, in a way that was consistent with the way the case was argued. The jury was not misled.
We agree with the Crown that for some trials the evidence respecting counts is so ‘collective’ in the assessment sense that efforts in a charge to disaggregate the counts can be a mere exercise of academic abstraction.
          Finally, as to s 686(1)(b)(iii) of the Code, it is relevant to note again that the appellant’s counsel approved the draft charge. Counsel’s approval at trial, while not conclusive, does speak to the defence perception of fairness of the instruction and also to whether there was a substantial wrong or miscarriage of justice: R v McCrimmon, 2022 ABCA 289 at paras 5-12, 417 CCC (3d) 390; R v C(JL), 2020 ABCA 356 at paras 40-41, AJ No 1219 (QL); see also R v Calnen, 2019 SCC 6 at para 38, 1 SCR 301. 
          As said in McCrimmon at para 12 about the impact of counsel’s agreement with a draft charge on an issue, “more is required on appeal than simply stating that ‘the trial judge is ultimately responsible for the contents of the charge’”. Counsel discussed this specific part of the charge with the trial judge. The defence was that the appellant did not commit any crimes. The jury returned verdicts of guilty on all three counts. Technical distinctions between the elements of the counts does not make the jury wrong in doing so. It is understandable why the trial defence counsel would not want the jury to lose sight of the essential position of the defence which is that none of what was alleged happened.
    V.            Conclusion
          The appeal is dismissed.
