./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/ca/2023abca11.html
              Timothy Lundle appeals his conviction of January 13, 2022 that he committed a sexual assault in June or July, 2020 contrary to s 271, Criminal Code, RSC 1985, c C-46. His sole ground of appeal is ineffective assistance of counsel, and to prove that ground he seeks to admit new evidence.
              For the reasons below, the new evidence application is dismissed, and the appeal is dismissed.
    II.            Facts
              At the time of trial, Mr Lundle was 61 and the complainant was 58 years of age. They had known each other since he was 19 and she was 16, and had an established sexual relationship. 
              On a night in June or July 2020, Mr Lundle called the complainant and asked her to come to his house. She said she was not feeling well but eventually agreed to come over. They talked for about an hour, when she told him again she did not feel well and needed to lie down. She lay down on a mattress in his living room.
              The complainant’s evidence was that about ten minutes later Mr Lundle got on top of her and forced her to have non-consensual sex, during which she told him twice to stop and said he was hurting her.
              When the sex was over, she got up crying and went to the bathroom to clean up. When she returned to the living room, Mr Lundle was asleep.
              After the incident, the complainant and Mr Lundle continued to see each other and discussed the alleged assault on several occasions. She reported the incident to the police in February 2021 and an information was laid on March 24, 2021.
 III.            Decision of the Trial Judge
              Trial proceeded for one day on December 23, 2021 before a Provincial Court judge and reasons for conviction were delivered January 13, 2022. 
              In his reasons, the trial judge reviewed the requirements for the actus reus and mens rea of sexual assault as set out in R v Barton, 2019 SCC 33, paras 89-90, 2 SCR 579. He reviewed the test in R v W(D), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), 1 SCR 742, 758, 63 CCC (3d) 397, as Mr Lundle testified in his own defence. The trial judge said he did not believe Mr Lundle and nothing in his evidence or other evidence raised a reasonable doubt in his mind. He said Mr Lundle was evasive, gave ever-changing evidence, conceded he did not remember the night in question, and his evidence was unclear, inconsistent, and contradictory. The trial judge said the complainant’s evidence was clear, concise, and consistent throughout. He found her evidence credible and reliable, and said “In short, I believe her”.
          On whether he should negatively weigh the continued relationship post-event in assessing the complainant’s credibility, the trial judge said it would be wrong to assume what was normal or expected behaviour of a stereotypical victim of sexual assault and make findings of credibility on that basis. He also placed no weight on the delay in complaint to the police; he accepted the complainant’s explanation that she had been friends with Mr Lundle for most of her life, trusted him, enjoyed their relationship, was in shock this had happened, and had raised the incident with him several times between when it occurred and when she decided to go to the police.
          The trial judge did not accept the defence of honest but mistaken belief in communicated consent on the basis there were no words or actions of the complainant that could give rise to an honest but mistaken belief, and the defence of a routine or typical consent in their relationship offended the twin myths with respect to consent; see R v Goldfinch, 2019 SCC 38, paras 34, 44, 45, 60, 62, 106, 119, 3 SCR 3.
 IV.            Ground of Appeal and Standard of Review
          Mr Lundle advances only a single ground of appeal: ineffective assistance of counsel. However, he points to five indicators of that ineffective assistance:
(1)   failure to advise of and seek instructions regarding the possibility of election for judge and jury;
(2)   failure to advise of the right to not testify in his own defence;
(3)   failure to bring a s 276 application to examine on previous sexual activity;
(4)   failure to adduce evidence of motive to fabricate; and
(5)   ineffective cross-examination.
          Technically there is no standard of review, as Mr Lundle has not asked this Court to review the decision of the trial judge.
          However, Mr Lundle must establish the facts upon which his claim is based; that the assistance of counsel was deficient (the performance component); and this deficiency produced prejudice to an extent that constituted a miscarriage of justice: s 686(1)(a)(iii) of the Criminal Code, either by breach of procedural fairness or where the trial’s result is compromised (the prejudice component). There is a presumption in favour of trial counsel’s competence in respect of decisions made at trial and the actions of defence counsel are assessed against a reasonableness standard, with reference to the circumstances of this case at the time of trial and without benefit of hindsight: R v Sauverwald, 2020 ABCA 388, paras 15-18, 394 CCC (3d) 516; R v GDB, 2000 SCC 22, paras 26-29, 1 SCR 520; R v White, 2022 SCC 7, para 6, 411 CCC (3d) 419.
 V.               New Evidence Application
          Mr Lundle applies to admit new evidence on appeal pursuant to s 683(1)(a) of the Criminal Code and the well-known principles in Palmer v The Queen, 1979 CanLII 8 (SCC), 1 SCR 759, 775, 106 DLR (3d) 212 and R v Lévesque, 2000 SCC 47, paras 1, 14-22, 2 SCR 487:
(1)   the evidence should generally not be admitted if, by due diligence, it could have been adduced at trial, provided that this general principle will not be applied as strictly in a criminal case as in civil cases;
(2)   the evidence must be relevant in the sense that it bears upon a decisive or potentially decisive issue in the trial;
(3)   the evidence must be credible in the sense that it is reasonably capable of belief; and
(4)   it must be such that if believed it could reasonably, when taken with the other evidence adduced at trial, be expected to have affected the result.
          The overriding consideration in application of these principles must be “the interests of justice”: Palmer, 775; Lévesque, paras 14, 17.
          In accordance with the procedure set out in R v Stolar, 1988 CanLII 65 (SCC), 1 SCR 480, 491-492, 40 CCC (3d) 1, we reserved our decision on the new evidence application and considered it with the appeal.
          The fresh evidence proposed to be admitted by Mr Lundle is his affidavit sworn August 15, 2022. It speaks to his conversations with trial defence counsel and in particular, his established consensual sexual relationship with the complainant, the fact that he could not recall the exact particulars of the incident in question, a particular explanation for a motive to fabricate by the complainant, the advice obtained post-trial about the necessity for a s 276 application to question on prior sexual activity, his right to have selected trial by judge and jury, and his right to stay silent during the trial. Mr Lundle waived privilege to allow his trial counsel to provide a response to his affidavit, which counsel did in a reply affidavit of October 14, 2022.
          Originally, Mr Lundle had also applied to admit the affidavit of his appellate counsel’s assistant reviewing trial counsel’s telephone responses to the allegations in the Lundle affidavit. However, in oral submissions he withdrew that application and the Court does not consider the affidavit in these reasons. It is not before the Court.
          It is clear that the proposed fresh evidence could not have been introduced before the trial judge, as it arose out of the allegation of ineffective assistance of counsel before and during the trial. The evidence is relevant to the allegation, as it bears upon the carriage of the trial. It is credible in the sense that it is reasonably capable of belief. As Mr Lundle’s sole ground of appeal is ineffective assistance of counsel, review of counsel’s conduct leading up to and during the trial is required, and may be potentially determinative. 
          The issue before this Court is whether Mr Lundle has suffered a miscarriage of justice which requires the proffered new evidence to be admitted in the interests of justice. In that regard, the proffered new evidence is received and considered below to determine whether it should be admitted into evidence.
 VI.            Analysis
(1)   Failure to advise and seek instructions regarding the possibility of election for judge and jury 
          In considering the issue of trial election, a miscarriage of justice may occur if an accused is not given the opportunity to make an informed election: R v Trought, 2021 ONCA 379, para 44, 156 OR (3d) 481. However, the accused, in most cases, must establish more than the loss of choice: White, para 7.
          In his affidavit, Mr Lundle says he was never given a choice to be tried in the Court of Queen’s Bench (now King’s Bench) by judge and jury, and he never discussed with trial counsel the pros and cons of trial by judge alone in Provincial Court or in the Court of Queen’s Bench with or without a jury. Additionally, he says had he been properly informed, he would have and still would choose to be tried by judge and jury.
          During cross-examination on affidavit, Mr Lundle reconfirmed that he did not know about the ability to have his trial heard before a judge and jury. He was aware of jury trials, but assumed they were only for “high-profile” matters involving celebrities. However, he did have several meetings and telephone conversations with trial counsel during counsel’s retainer and in preparation for trial. He called his trial counsel immediately on arrest. He said he knew his trial counsel handled criminal matters in Mayerthorpe, and that “he knew me -- the best”. He was also advised that trial counsel would be retiring at the end of the year and that if this matter was not heard before then, he would have to find a different lawyer.
          Mr Lundle agreed he wanted this charge to be dealt with “as quickly as possible” because it was causing him “a lot of stress”.
          A number of exhibits were put to Mr Lundle in cross-examination on affidavit. With respect to a letter of March 22, 2021 from trial counsel, he acknowledged he had been advised it was uncertain what trial counsel’s fees would be; that needed to “be determined by the steps taken and the length and location of trial”. The letter went on to say that “Assuming a trial of 1/2 day at the Provincial Court House in Mayerthorpe”, trial counsel’s normal fees would be $5,000.
          In a second letter of May 19, 2021, trial counsel advised Mr Lundle that “once we determine how we are going to proceed with this matter, I will be in a better position to advise you as to what I anticipate my legal fees will be”. 
          There was a telephone call between trial counsel and Mr Lundle on May 19, but Mr Lundle does not recollect the content of that conversation. He confirmed there were “a few conversations by phone”, and that trial counsel checked in with him to make sure he agreed with how the matter was progressing. He said “I trusted him that he would handle everything ... I felt good about having him as a lawyer”. 
          In a further letter of May 31, 2021, trial counsel confirmed he had “attended in Provincial Court on [Mr Lundle’s behalf] by way of Webex on Thursday May 27, 2021”, the Crown had proceeded by way of indictment, and “as per your instructions an election of Provincial Court Judge and a plea of not guilty was entered”. Mr Lundle said however he did not recall giving specific instructions as to how the matter was to proceed and he did not know “why he worded it like that”. The transcript of the May 27, 2021 appearance shows that trial counsel represented to the court: “I do have instructions from Mr. Lundle to enter an election of Provincial Court Judge and a plea of not guilty”.
          The signed Appointment of Counsel by Designation states that the accused is required to appear in person whenever evidence is heard, jurors are selected, or for any sentencing decision. Mr Lundle does remember that document but not a specific conversation about it.
          Trial counsel confirmed that he had acted for Mr Lundle on a prior matrimonial matter and a prior criminal matter, but neither had gone to trial. He indicated he did not have specific recollection of the details of conversations between himself and Mr Lundle, nor did he have written notes on his file that outlined those discussions. He did however say that he had some specific recollections. 
          Trial counsel indicated in his affidavit he was “certain that this was discussed”, referring to the mode of election. He said he was “certain in [his] mind” because it was his invariable practice to have that discussion. He said he would have had those conversations in person because that was his normal practice: “in each case that I’m involved in it involved advising a client of an election. Basically I know what … steps I would normally take”. However, he said Mr Lundle “wanted the matter dealt with”, felt comfortable with him as trial counsel, and “wanted [him] to handle the matter”.
          Trial counsel did specifically advise Mr Lundle that he was planning on retiring at the end of 2021 and he “needed to ensure that [Mr Lundle] did not want a trial in the Court of Queen’s Bench”. He advised Mr Lundle that if the matter was to proceed in the Court of Queen’s Bench it would take “perhaps up to a year before the matter gets to trial”. He said:
I advised him if the matter was to proceed in the Court of Queen’s Bench, I would not be prepared to handle the matter, and that I would be prepared to make a recommendation as to other counsel. He indicated to me that he wanted me to handle the matter … he wanted to get it dealt with as quickly as possible.
          Trial counsel said specifically: “he instructed me at the end to proceed by Provincial Court”. On December 23, 2021, at the commencement of trial, he confirmed both a Provincial Court election and that the matter was set for that day. Mr Lundle was present and did not object to that confirmation.
          The submission for Mr Lundle essentially discounted as valueless the reference by trial counsel to his standard practice. While a trial judge may choose not to rely on standard practice evidence, it is clear such circumstantial evidence is not axiomatically inadmissible. In R v Watson (1996), 1996 CanLII 4008 (ON CA), 108 CCC (3d) 310, 324-325, 30 OR (3d) 161 (CA), the Court said: 
Where a person’s conduct in given circumstances is in issue, evidence that the person repeatedly acted in a certain way when those circumstances arose in the past has been received as circumstantial evidence that the person acted in conformity with past practice on the occasion in question…Evidence of habit involves an inference of conduct on a given occasion based on an established pattern of past conduct. It is an inference of conduct from conduct.…Evidence of habit proceeds on the basis that repeated conduct in a given situation is a reliable predictor of conduct in that situation.
          In addition, we note these cases reflecting how standard or systematic practice, or evidenced contradictions to it, can operate as circumstantial evidence: Kerr v Creighton, 2008 BCCA 75, para 24, 9 WWR 463; R v Shams, 2017 MBCA 116 paras 5-6; R v Tomashewsky, 1983 ABCA 52, para 1, 19 MVR 165; R v McGuire, BCJ No 1209 (QL), para 6 (CA); R v Cunningham, 2006 ABCA 345, paras 4-5, 401 AR 35; R v Thompson (2001), 2001 CanLII 24186 (ON CA), 151 CCC (3d) 339, paras 7-9, 52 OR (3d) 779 (CA); Dickie v Minett, 2014 ONCA 265, para 4. As exemplified in Dickie, such evidence is common with experts and other professional witnesses.
          Standard practice is also the foundation for much of the common law and statute respecting the admission of documentary evidence: see Kon Construction Ltd v Terranova Developments Ltd, 2015 ABCA 249, paras 46-49, 387 DLR (4th) 623. In that context, the mere possibility of departure from standard practice or mere possibility of inadequacy of a standard practice does not defeat the common sense inference that the practice was followed. Nor does it make relevant the exploration of either possibility, absent some substantive reason: see R v Gubbins, 2018 SCC 44 paras 15, 46-51, 3 SCR 35. Counsel for Mr Lundle argued in effect that because trial counsel could not specifically recall some of what he said to Mr Lundle, trial counsel did not discuss those things with him. In light of the documents available to this Court, and Mr Lundle’s testimony on questioning, we are persuaded that trial counsel’s version is substantiated.
          On a balance of probabilities, it seems clear Mr Lundle was advised of his right to elect trial before a Provincial Court judge, or a Queen’s Bench judge, and in the latter case between judge alone, or judge and jury. This is reflected in the constellation of evidence, including the wording of the letters of March 22, May 19, and May 31, 2021, the Appointment of Counsel by Designation, trial counsel’s recollections, and representations to the court on May 27 and December 23, 2021. Mr Lundle says he did not receive that advice, but trial counsel has specific recollection that he did provide that advice, and it was his invariable practice to provide that advice. It is clear Mr Lundle wanted to proceed quickly, that he understood trial counsel would only be available until year end when he intended to retire, and that would necessitate an election for a Provincial Court trial in Mayerthorpe.
          This alleged indicator of ineffective assistance of counsel is dismissed.
(2)   Failure to advise of the right not to testify in his own defence
          The critical question in determining whether or not an accused should testify is “who made the decision?”, trial counsel or the accused: R v Archer (2005), 2005 CanLII 36444 (ON CA), 203 OAC 56, para 139, 202 CCC (3d) 60.
          Mr Lundle says he was not advised that he did not have to testify in his own defence. However, he agreed he wanted the opportunity to tell his side of the story. Trial counsel says he did advise Mr Lundle of his right to remain silent and that it would have been his invariable practice to do so. He said: “The decision to testify was something we discussed”.
          Counsel said he had “specific recollections” of this discussion:
I would have indicated to him that he does not have to take the stand, but I did indicate to him that in this instance, I saw this case as a he said/she said type of case, and I anticipated based upon the evidence that he would have to take the stand, and that was a great concern to me because I was concerned with whether or not Mr. Lundle would be a very effective witness.
          Trial counsel said he indicated to Mr Lundle that he did not have to testify but that it “may be in his best interests that he . . . testify”. He said: “we reviewed matters in great detail. I tried to prep him.”
          He confirmed he had no specific recollection of “when that conversation took place” but he specifically remembered “that I did advise him of that”, the right to remain silent. He said: “my normal practice is that I would do that, and in this instance I’m certain I would because like I say, I had real concerns about Mr. Lundle’s effectiveness as a witness”.
          Further, after the Crown’s case was closed, trial counsel said he believes they took a short adjournment to determine whether Mr Lundle was still prepared to testify. Trial counsel said the complainant came across as a convincing witness and he would have advised Mr Lundle that he thought it would be in his best interest to testify.
          It appears clear that a discussion did occur both before trial and after the closing of the Crown’s case about whether Mr Lundle should testify and the decision was made between trial counsel and Mr Lundle that he would do so.
          This alleged indicator of ineffective assistance of counsel is dismissed.
(3)   Failure to bring a s 276 application to explore evidence that the complainant had engaged in prior relevant sexual activity with the accused
          Mr Lundle says trial counsel opened his cross-examination by asking questions about prior sexual activity and the Crown objected on the basis that there had been no s 276 application. However, after discussions between counsel and with Mr Lundle, his trial counsel was able to cross-examine the complainant, confirming that she had been in a “boyfriend/girlfriend relationship” with Mr Lundle and they had discussed moving in together.
          Trial counsel advised that he did want to adduce evidence that Mr Lundle had been in a relationship with the complainant, but did not think it was necessary to bring a s 276 application for that purpose. He said this was “not a case where past conduct would inform the issue of consent or mistaken belief in consent”. He said the Crown was prepared to acknowledge that the complainant and Mr Lundle had been in a lengthy relationship. Counsel also said he was concerned Mr Lundle would not be found to be credible, as his position was that every sexual encounter with the complainant was the same and there was nothing that differentiated them in his mind, but that he could specifically remember the date of this encounter. Counsel said:
But the problem was ... he seemed to know the date she was referring to, which gave me cause for concern. How would he know the specific date when he hadn’t been confronted with this until several months after the alleged incident?
          Trial counsel determined that he “didn’t see anything to be gained by a Section 276 application” under those circumstances. This was a tactical decision by trial counsel, with knowledge of his client, in the circumstance of this case, and there is a presumption of trial counsel’s competence in making that decision: Sauverwald, paras 15-18; White, para 6.
          This alleged indicator of ineffective assistance of counsel is dismissed.
(4)   Failure to adduce evidence of motive to fabricate
          Mr Lundle says that because there had been no s 276 application, there was no opportunity for trial counsel to adduce evidence that the complainant would have motive to fabricate. He says he has erectile dysfunction at times and had been unable to perform on a number of occasions with the complainant. He also says that he had taken medication and it did not help. Mr Lundle says the complainant was unhappy about that situation. She was also unhappy that she had caught him viewing pornography, using a dating app, and inviting his son to live with him which frustrated her plan to move in with him. After that, the complainant was “furious” and the relationship “got a lot worse”. He says all of this led the complainant to threaten him with a sexual assault complaint if he did not abide by her demands in the relationship.
          Trial counsel did, however, ask questions in cross-examination of the complainant to point to animus, including that she was jealous or upset because Mr Lundle had broken off their relationship. For example, during cross-examination trial counsel was able to assert the complainant was angry at Mr Lundle “ever since he broke off his relationship with you”. He also cross-examined on her disappointment at not moving in with Mr Lundle, her anger at his calling the police when she threatened to commit suicide, and her repeated assertions that she would “charge him with something”.
          Additionally, trial counsel said one reason why Mr Lundle wanted to testify was “to put his evidence of the complainant’s motive to fabricate before the court”. He said “Mr Lundle wanted the court to know what he believed motivated this allegation against him”. Mr Lundle did testify and did put this defence into evidence.
          This alleged indicator of ineffective assistance of counsel is dismissed.
(5)   Ineffective cross-examination
          The allegation of ineffective cross-examination reflects both the issues of absence of a s 276 application and effective cross-examination on motive to fabricate. Specifically, Mr Lundle complains there was no cross-examination on text messages provided by the complainant to the police. He suggests the text messages would show he was extremely upset at the time of the complaint because he believed it to be false and motivated by the complainant’s jealousy, her concern over his viewing pornography, and the use of a dating app.
          However, trial counsel did cross-examine on the text messages. They were marked as exhibit A for identification at that point, later exhibit 1 on the cross-examination of Mr Lundle. The complainant denied ever having sent these messages. 
          Mr Lundle was also concerned that there was no cross-examination on the bruising shown in certain photographs, since the complainant admitted to him she did not take the pictures at the time of the assault but much later after the “bruises came back”. He says trial counsel did not obtain the metadata of the images provided nor explore whether the complainant had lied to the police about when the images were taken. He says failure to cross-examine on those messages fell below a reasonable standard of competence and created prejudice to him that could reasonably be perceived to have caused a miscarriage of justice.
          However, the photographs were never mentioned at trial, they were not marked as an exhibit, and there was no benefit, and possibly a significant risk, in raising photographs of bruising that were not otherwise before the trial judge.
          This alleged indicator of ineffective assistance of counsel is dismissed.
VII.            Conclusion
          Each of the alleged indicators of ineffective assistance of counsel is without merit. Mr Lundle has suffered no miscarriage of justice, there has been no breach of procedural fairness, and the trial result was not compromised. It is not in the interests of justice that the proffered new evidence be admitted. In light of this decision, the proffered new evidence remains sealed.
          The application to admit new evidence is dismissed. The appeal is dismissed.
          At the conclusion of oral submissions, the Court reserved decision and determined that the terms of Mr Lundle’s consent judicial interim release pending appeal would continue, except that paragraph 4(e) would be amended to require that he surrender in accordance with the directions of this Court. This Court now directs that Mr Lundle surrender himself to the Edmonton Remand Centre within 48 hours of release of these reasons for decision.
