./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/ca/2023abca20.html
              The appellant appeals his sentence for several offences committed in the context of trafficking a stolen vehicle, possession of firearms, and possession of methamphetamine and fentanyl for the purpose of trafficking. The appellant argues that the sentence imposed is unfit and is “crushing”. 
              In particular, the appellant takes issue with the sentencing judge’s imposition of six months incarceration for Count 2, carrying a restricted firearm in a careless manner contrary to s 86(1) of the Criminal Code, RSC 1985, c C-46, and the sentencing judge’s decision that this sentence be served consecutive to the other firearms offences, despite both Crown and Defence submissions that it be served concurrently. The appellant also submits that the sentencing judge erred in imposing consecutive sentences for Count 4, the s 95(1)(a) offence, and Counts 6 and 7, the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, SC 1996, c 19 [CDSA] possession for the purpose of trafficking offences. 
              An appellate court cannot interfere with a sentencing decision unless the sentence is demonstrably unfit or there is an error in principle that had an impact on the sentence imposed: R v Friesen, 2020 SCC 9 at paras 25-26; R v Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64 at paras 41 and 44.
              The decision as to when it is appropriate to impose consecutive sentences is a discretionary one treated with the same deference afforded to the length of sentences ordered: R v McDonnell, 1997 CanLII 389 (SCC), 1 SCR 948 at para 46, 196 AR 321; see also R v Roberts, 2020 ABCA 434 at para 31.
              With respect to Count 2, there is a broad range of possible sentences for this offence, ranging from a conditional discharge, fine or probation, to one- or two-years incarceration. While the offence concerned a handgun found in the backpack that was being worn by the third-party in a Walmart, the judge found that the firearm belonged to the appellant. The sentencing judge considered the taking of the firearm into a public place in deciding to impose the 6-month sentence. The sentencing judge further considered that the carrying of the firearm in a careless manner was “not part of the drug trafficking” and must be served consecutive to the sentences for the other offences: Sentencing Reasons at para 77. We see no basis to interfere with the sentence imposed for Count 2.
              With respect to Count 4, the sentencing judge acknowledged that possession of a weapon should not be considered an aggravating factor for the CDSA possession for the purpose of trafficking offences and at the same time receive a separate consecutive sentence as that would be a form of double-counting: Sentencing Reasons at para 83. The sentencing judge then held that the “Alberta approach” is that sentences for weapons and trafficking offences should run consecutively, but if the global sentence is excessive, it may be reduced through the application of the totality principle: Sentencing Reasons at para 85 citing R v Dyck, 2020 ABCA 412, R v Bedi, 2015 ABCA 361; and R v Swales, 2016 BCCA 502.
              While there is no single “Alberta approach” requiring the use of consecutive sentences for weapons and drug trafficking offences, the sentencing judge nevertheless followed an approach available to him. The ultimate question is whether the approach chosen in any given case leads to a proportionate sentence: Roberts at para 31. Here, the sentencing judge exercised his discretion to impose consecutive sentences for the weapons and possession for the purposes of trafficking offences, then turned his mind to overall fitness of the sentence when he applied the totality principle and ultimately arrived at a sentence of 12 and a half years incarceration for all offences. We are not satisfied that the sentence imposed is demonstrably unfit, or that the sentencing judge committed an error in principle that had an impact on sentence.
              Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.
