./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/ca/2023abca2.html
              This is an application for judicial interim release pending a sentence appeal pursuant to s. 679(4) of the Criminal Code. 
              The applicant originally filed an appeal of both his conviction and sentence related to a break and enter with intent to commit an indictable offence, use of a firearm while committing an indictable offence, and pointing a firearm. He pleaded guilty to possession of a firearm without a license and possession of a prohibited weapon without a license. He received a global sentence of seven years penitentiary time less 645 days of pre-trial credit.
              The applicant was denied legal aid coverage for the conviction appeal but obtained it for his sentence appeal. The applicant seeks judicial interim release pending his sentence appeal. However, the conviction appeal is proceeding, and counsel on this application advised that he has instructions to apply for state-funded counsel to be appointed for the conviction appeal, though that application has not yet been made.
              After some discussion, the applicant decided to proceed with his application for judicial interim release on the sentence appeal while the issues with respect to the conviction appeal remain outstanding. Frankly, this seems to put the cart before the horse. In any event, I will address the application before me.
II.    Analysis
              The test for judicial interim release on a sentence appeal is harder to satisfy than on a conviction appeal. Section 679(4) of the Criminal Code requires an applicant to establish:
(a)               the appeal has sufficient merit that, in the circumstances, it would cause unnecessary hardship if the applicant were detained in custody;
(b)               the applicant will surrender himself into custody in accordance with the terms of the order; and 
(c)               his detention is not necessary in the public interest.
              It is the first element that is different. It is more onerous than for a conviction appeal which requires that an appeal not be frivolous: s. 679(3). Sufficient merit means “arguable merit”: R v Ewanchuk, 2000 ABCA 303 at paras 5-6.
              The applicant raises three grounds of appeal which must be evaluated under the first branch of the test.
              First, the applicant argues the finding that the firearm was loaded at the time of the assault was in error. The sentencing judge did not accept the applicant’s evidence when he testified. This is a high threshold to overcome.
              Second, the applicant submits that the sentencing judge relied on R v Matwiy, 1996 ABCA 63 which is the starting point case on sentencing for home invasions. While the sentencing judge said he was not following that case, the applicant submits his analysis was shaped and bound by Matwiy resulting in an overreliance on legal principles not applicable on the facts. The sentencing judge clearly distinguished Matwiy and explained why he did not think it governed sentencing in this case. However, the sentencing judge did find that the offence had elements of a home invasion. The applicant argues he would not call the incident a home invasion but did not say what it should be called. Yet, the applicant snuck into the victim’s home and hid with a duffel bag containing a loaded firearm, ammunition, knives, a pair of black gloves, and a roll of duct tape. It was unclear how long he was in the house, but likely for several hours while the victim’s adult child was home and while her school-aged child was picked up by the victim’s in-laws to go to school. When the victim came home and entered her bedroom, the applicant emerged from the ensuite bathroom, pushed the victim down on the bed, placed his gloved hand on her mouth and pointed a loaded firearm at her head. The sentencing judge referred to these facts in coming to his conclusion that the offence had elements of a home invasion.
          Third, the applicant asserts that the sentencing judge misidentified or misapplied aggravating and mitigating factors which are errors in principle. Specifically, he argues the sentencing judge double counted the use of the firearm considering it an aggravating factor and failed to consider mitigating factors contained in the pre-sentence report. It is a high threshold to overcome for review on appeal.
          To succeed, the sufficient merit of the appeal must be evaluated in the context of the potential unnecessary hardship if the applicant were to remain in custody. I find that the applicant does not meet this first branch of the test under s. 679(4). To show unnecessary hardship, the applicant must establish that the appeal has sufficient merit that, if judicial interim release is not granted, he will have spent more time in custody than that subsequently determined to be fit: R v Figiel, 2015 ABCA 19 at para 10. No special hardship is claimed in this case, rather it is the risk of serving a sentence that is in excess of what should have been imposed. With the pre-trial credit, the applicant has five years remaining in his sentence. 
          While the Crown concedes the applicant will surrender himself into custody in accordance with the terms of the order, failure to satisfy the first branch of the test for judicial interim release pursuant to s. 679(4) is sufficient to dismiss the application. Accordingly, I need not assess whether detention is necessary in the public interest.
III. Conclusion
          The application for judicial interim release is dismissed. 
