./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/ca/2023abca29.html
              The appellant pleaded guilty to aggravated assault under s 268 of the Criminal Code, arising out of an unprovoked and vicious attack in which he slashed a machete into the neck of the complainant. He also pleaded guilty to a further count of breaching an undertaking given to a police officer not to be in possession of a weapon (s 145(5.1)). In a detailed written judgment, the sentencing judge concluded that the appellant was a dangerous offender pursuant to s 753(1) and imposed a sentence of penitentiary detention for an indeterminate period pursuant to s 753(4)(a) and (4.1): R v Runions, 2021 ABQB 67. 
              The appellant does not dispute the finding that he was a dangerous offender but appeals his indeterminate sentence. 
              The appeal is allowed for the reasons that follow.
II.    Background Facts
              The offence precipitating the dangerous offender designation and sentence occurred on July 20, 2017, after an unprovoked attack that likely would have been fatal but for the quick medical intervention of a bystander. At the time of the attack, the appellant was on judicial interim release and bound by the terms of an undertaking, which included a prohibition on possessing a weapon. 
              The attack occurred after the appellant and an acquaintance met with the complainant and noticed he was wearing a gold chain. The appellant told the complainant he liked the chain and asked if he was interested in selling it. After the complainant said no and placed the chain in his pocket, the three men travelled a short distance together into an alley. In the alley, the complainant heard a firearm click and turned around to see the acquaintance brandishing an imitation gun and the appellant holding a large machete. Believing he would be robbed, the complainant attempted to move but the appellant quickly slashed the machete into the left side of his neck. The complainant ran down the back alley, yelling for help and tightly applying pressure to his neck. A passerby provided prompt medical assistance to stem the loss of blood. The complainant was transported to the hospital in life-threatening condition after losing two litres of blood. He immediately underwent surgery and received a blood transfusion. 
              The stab wound was severe and life-threatening, and had a profound impact on the complainant, who was left with impaired facial functioning and had to relearn basic functions such as eating and speaking. It left a large scar on his face and neck, which serves as a constant visual reminder of the attack. He suffers from ongoing post-traumatic stress, fear, and sleeplessness. The attack was unprovoked and vicious. The complainant was unarmed, surprised, and believed he would die. 
              In addition to the predicate offence, the appellant had several convictions between 2009 and 2018, among which were minor summary convictions such as mischief and theft under. However, the Crown relied on the following offences to establish a pattern of behaviour:

2008: assault, s 266 
2010: breaking and entering, s 348(1)
2012: assault, s 266 
2017 (July 1): aggravated assault, s 268
2017 (July 30): aggravated assault, s 268
2017 (July 20): aggravated assault, 268 (predicate offence)

Sentencing Decision
               The sentencing judge designated the appellant a dangerous offender and sentenced him to an indeterminate sentence.
              The statutory scheme governing dangerous offender sentencing has two steps. First, the offender must be designated as a dangerous offender under s 753(1) of the Criminal Code. Second, the sentencing judge must determine the appropriate sentence under ss 753(4) and (4.1): R v Zoe, 2020 NWTCA 1 at para 20.
          The designation stage has both backward-looking and forward-looking components. The judge must look at the past behaviour of the offender and determine whether the conduct falls within ss 753(1)(a) or 753(1)(b) of the Criminal Code. These sections require that the underlying offence be a serious personal injury offence and the offender be a threat based on evidence:

of a pattern of repetitive behaviour and likelihood of death or injury to others if not restrained (s 753(1)(a)(i));
of a pattern of aggressive behaviour and a substantial degree of indifference to the reasonably foreseeable consequences of such behaviour (s 753(1)(a)(ii));
any brutal behaviour which indicates that the offender is unlikely to be inhibited by normal standards of behavioural restraint in the future (s 753(1)(a)(iii));
a pattern of sexual offences that demonstrates a failure to control sexual impulses in the past and the likelihood of causing injury, pain, or other evil through failure to control sexual impulses in the future (s 753(1)(b)).

(Zoe at para 26)
          Second, the sentencing judge must conduct a prospective assessment of dangerousness and risk. The judge must be satisfied that the offender “poses a high likelihood of harmful recidivism and that his or her conduct is intractable... meaning behaviour that the offender is unable to surmount”: R v Boutilier, 2017 SCC 64 at para 27. 
          Given the appellant’s past offences, including the predicate offence, the sentencing judge found there was a history of repetitive and increasingly violent behaviour that established a pattern under s 753(1)(a)(i). The appellant does not contest that finding. The sentencing judge noted that there was little to no provocation precipitating the appellant’s violent attacks. The sentencing judge was satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the pattern of repetitive aggressive behaviour involving a likelihood of death or injury, including the predicate offence, demonstrated a failure by the appellant to restrain his behaviour. There was a likelihood that this aggressive behaviour would continue in the future. 
          After looking backwards and establishing a pattern of behaviour involving a likelihood of death or injury, the sentencing judge turned to the inquiry of future risk and intractability. The prospective analysis requires the Crown to prove a likelihood the offender is a future threat to the life, safety or physical or mental well-being of others. 
 
          The sentencing judge found the appellant’s behaviour was intractable and there was a high likelihood he would cause death, injury, or severe psychological damage to other persons in the future. The judge came to this finding after reviewing viva voce and written evidence of Anika Tusun (probation officer), Alan Beasley (community parole officer), Laura Olsen (social worker), Deena Nessman (psychologist), Dr. Hashman (psychiatrist), Mercedes Garcia (institutional parole officer), Corrine Weeks (parole officer supervisor), Ashley Prairie Chicken (Gladue report writer), and Codie Stephan (Bowden Institution manager). While the sentencing judge thoroughly reviewed and outlined all the relevant evidence (see paras 152-520), he substantially relied on the evidence of Dr. Hashman and Ms. Nessman in reaching his designation conclusion. 
          Several factors led to the finding of intractability, including the appellant’s lack of candour and truthfulness. The sentencing judge found the appellant to be a "chronically unreliable narrator", making it impossible to assess whether treatment was effective. The appellant was dishonest about a range of matters, from innocuous things such as speaking French or Russian, to fabricating hallucinations and claiming to have committed brutal acts of violence. Furthermore, the sentencing judge found the appellant’s false claims of perpetuating greater amounts of violence reflected a deeply seated antisocial view that values and normalizes violence. 
          The sentencing judge concluded that, if released, the appellant was highly likely to resume gang affiliations. This finding was based on the appellant’s patterned history of returning to a gang lifestyle, along with skepticism expressed by Dr. Hashman and Ms. Nessman around the appellant’s ability to retract from his known community. 
          The sentencing judge accepted Ms. Nessman’s assessment finding the appellant to be at very high risk for general recidivism (based on static factors), at high risk for violently reoffending (based on static and dynamic factors), and meeting the criteria for antisocial and borderline personality disorders. Ms. Nessman was not confident that the appellant could be managed in the community. 
          Finally, the sentencing judge found the appellant’s history of breaching parole conditions and sustained substance abuse pose a high risk for the future and contribute to his intractability. 
          The threat analysis concluded with the sentencing judge finding the appellant was substantially indifferent to the reasonably foreseeable consequences to his victims in relation to the predicate offence and other pattern offences. These factors weighed towards a high risk of recidivism and pathological intractability. The sentencing judge declared the appellant to be a dangerous offender. 
           The sentencing judge then moved to the sentencing analysis. He acknowledged that when sentencing the appellant, he must “impose the least intrusive sentence required to reduce Mr Runions’ public safety threat to an acceptable level” and “conduct an individualized assessment of all relevant circumstances and consider the sentencing objectives set out in ss. 753(4), (4.1) and 718-718.2, which include those developed for Indigenous offenders”: Runions at para 584. 
          The sentencing judge reviewed the Gladue considerations, found they reduced the appellant’s moral culpability and blameworthiness, and that “absent the balancing of other important sentencing factors would most certainly justify a reduction in what would otherwise be an appropriate sentence”: Runions at paras 601-603. However, he held Gladue factors did “little to change the obvious gravity of the grave circumstances of the predicate offence, and the fact ... Mr Runions violently injured and endangered the life of three people in approximately a one-month period”: Runions at para 606. The sentencing judge concluded that Gladue factors were not persuasive in helping establish “that Mr Runions’ risk to public safety can be controlled or managed in the community”: Runions at para 609. 
          After reiterating some evidence of the appellant’s high risk for violent recidivism, the sentencing judge held an indeterminate sentence is necessary as there is “no realistic possibility of eventual control of Mr. Runions in the community”: Runions at paras 610-611. 
          The appellant appeals his indeterminate sentence. 
III. Standard of Review
          A dangerous offender has the right to appeal their designation and sentence "on any ground of law or fact or mixed law and fact": s 759(1) of the Criminal Code. Questions of law are reviewed on a correctness standard, and questions of fact are reviewed on a reasonableness standard: Boutilier at para 81.
          The impact of an indeterminate sentence on an offender’s liberty requires appellate courts to apply a more robust standard of review for dangerous offender sentencing appeals: R v Natomagan, 2022 ABCA 48 at para 83. However, this standard is not equivalent to a trial de novo, and the findings of fact of sentencing judges must be afforded deference: Natomagan at para 83.
IV. Dangerous Offender Sentencing Analysis
Applicable Law
          Once an offender is declared to be a dangerous offender, s 753(4) sets out the mandatory sentencing options, which require that a dangerous offender “shall” receive one of the following sentences:
(a)   a sentence of indeterminate detention in a penitentiary;
(b)   the appropriate sentence for the underlying offence (minimum 2 years in a penitentiary) plus a long-term supervision order for a maximum of 10 years; or
(c)   a sentence applying standard sentencing principles for the offence for which the offender has been convicted.
          Section 753(4.1) mandates an indeterminate penitentiary sentence unless the court “is satisfied by the evidence adduced during the hearing of the application that there is a reasonable expectation that a lesser measure under paragraph (4)(b) or (c) will adequately protect the public against the commission by the offender of murder or a serious personal injury offence.”
          In Boutilier, the Supreme Court endorsed the framework outlined by Justice Tuck-Jackson in R v Crowe when sentencing under s 753(4.1) of the Criminal Code (at para 70):
First, if the court is satisfied that a conventional sentence, which may include a period of probation, if available in law, will adequately protect the public against the commission of murder or a serious personal injury offence, then that sentence must be imposed. If the court is not satisfied that this is the case, then it must proceed to a second assessment and determine whether it is satisfied that a conventional sentence of a minimum of 2 years of imprisonment, followed by a long-term supervision order for a period that does not exceed 10 years, will adequately protect the public against the commission by the offender of murder or a serious personal injury offence. If the answer is “yes”, then that sentence must be imposed. If the answer is “no”, then the court must proceed to the third step and impose a detention in a penitentiary for an indeterminate period of time. Section 753(4.1) reflects the fact that, just as nothing less than a sentence reducing the risk to an acceptable level is required for a dangerous offender, so too is nothing more required.
          The effect of ss 753(4) and (4.1) is that there is no presumption of an indeterminate sentence. Instead, a sentencing judge must “conduct a thorough inquiry into the possibility of control in the community and consider all of the evidence to determine the fittest sentence” and the least intrusive sentence required should be imposed: Zoe at para 32; Boutilier at paras 60-69. 
          By the time a dangerous offender has reached the sentencing or ‘penalty’ phase, there is ample evidence of prospective risk and intractability from the designation stage. The evidence relating to intractability will likely overlap between the first and second stages of analysis, but the issue before the court is fundamentally different. As stated in Boutilier at para 31:
The designation stage is concerned with assessing the future threat posed by an offender. The penalty stage is concerned with imposing the appropriate sentence to manage the established threat. Though evidence may establish that an offender is unable to surmount his or her violent conduct, the sentencing judge must, at the penalty stage, turn his or her mind to whether the risk arising from the offender’s behaviour can be adequately managed outside of an indeterminate sentence. 
          The penalty analysis focuses on what is necessary to adequately protect the public while bearing in mind that the least restrictive penalties should be exhausted prior to arriving at an indeterminate sentence: Boutilier at para 69. Given the overlap between evidence at the two stages of a dangerous offender sentencing, it is particularly important that the penalty analysis consider whether community management mechanisms and future treatment are— or are not— adequate to manage the risk. 
Application to the Sentencing Decision
 
          Upon reviewing the reasons of the sentencing judge, we have concluded that he did not conduct the necessary analysis at the penalty stage. As set out in Boutilier, the test at the penalty stage is distinct from the designation stage, and it requires a robust review of the evidence to assess the necessary sentence to manage the established threat. The analysis must focus on prospective treatment options and community control mechanisms to determine if a dangerous offender can first be controlled in the community in a manner that adequately protects the public from murder or a serious personal injury offence. 
          The sentencing judge recognized that s 753(4.1) does not impose an onus or rebuttable presumption for indeterminate detention and that the court “must impose the least intrusive sentence required to reduce Mr. Runions’ public safety threat to an acceptable level … (and) must conduct an individualized assessment of all relevant circumstances and consider the sentencing objectives set out in ss.753(4), (4.1) and 718-718.2, which include those developed for Indigenous offenders”: Runions at paras 583-584.
          However, the crux of the reasons for imposing an indeterminate sentence came down to reliance on the evidence of Dr Hashman, which had led to the finding of intractability at the designation stage and the conclusion that the appellant is a dangerous offender (at paras 610-11): 
…I accept Dr. Hashman’s opinion which recognizes that Mr. Runions’ adolescence and young adult life have been characterized by a persistence of substance abuse, a strong affiliation with gang membership, repeated and seriously assaultive behaviour, and poor compliance with release conditions. Mr. Runions has also demonstrated limited empathy for his victims, and Dr. Hashman opined that the duration and severity of his substance abuse disorder, his antisocial personality disorder, and his disingenuous presentation with significant symptom exaggeration was such that Mr. Runions’ prognosis is considered to be a high risk for violent recidivism. Mr. Runions was also identified with having cognitive deficits (although it was not suggested that these were at a level where Mr. Runions could not still learn).
I agree with Dr. Hashman’s conclusions, and as I have considered each of Boutilier’s stages of analysis, I conclude that there is no realistic possibility of eventual control of Mr. Runions in the community. All of the evidence, including the Gladue factors, do not provide me with any comfort that there is a reasonable expectation that Mr. Runions can be managed in the community. There is no less restrictive means by which the public can be protected.
The reasons do not adequately address evidence relevant to community control or explain why the appellant could not be managed in the community. 
          In upholding the constitutionality of s 753(4.1), Boutilier directed, at para 68: 
Under s. 753(4.1), the sentencing judge is under the obligation to conduct a “thorough inquiry” into the possibility of control in the community: Johnson, at para. 50. The judge considers all the evidence presented during the hearing in order to determine the fittest sentence for the offender:
The judge should . . . take into account all the evidence available before making a determination, which will inevitably require a thorough investigation. Once such an investigation has been conducted, it will be up to the judge to determine the sentence; there is no obligation on any of the parties to prove on any standard the adequate sentence one way or another.
(Neuberger, at p. 4-4.1; see also p. 10-10.)
          A new inquiry and a robust assessment of the relevant evidence is required at the penalty stage. Reliance on the rationale behind the finding of intractability at the designation stage does not satisfy the requirement for a thorough inquiry into the possibility of control in the community contemplated in Boutilier and risks a presumptive indeterminate sentence for dangerous offenders. A distinct analysis at the penalty stage will include consideration of the relevant evidence and firstly the possibility of control in the community, and exhaust determinate sentencing options before arriving at an indeterminate sentence. 
We cannot accept the Crown’s submission that - when read as a whole - the sentencing judge’s reasons demonstrate no error. As Boutilier directs, prospective evidence of treatability plays a different role at the penalty stage than at the designation stage (para 45):
The same prospective evidence of treatability plays a different role at the different stages of the judge’s decision-making process. At the designation stage, treatability informs the decision on the threat posed by an offender, whereas at the penalty stage, it helps determine the appropriate sentence to manage this threat. Thus, offenders will not be designated as dangerous if their treatment prospects are so compelling that the sentencing judge cannot conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that they present a high likelihood of harmful recidivism or that their violent pattern is intractable: see Neuberger, at p. 7-1, by M. Henschel. However, even where the treatment prospects are not compelling enough to affect the judge’s conclusion on dangerousness, they will still be relevant in choosing the sentence required to adequately protect the public.
The Crown’s position risks collapsing the inquiry required at the penalty stage into the inquiry at the designation stage. 
          We acknowledge that the sentencing judge addressed the prospective evidence of treatability in the designation stage of the analysis, but that is not sufficient. For example, at paragraphs 545 to 552 the sentencing judge reviewed the evidence on treatability from Dr. Hashman and referenced Mr. Beasley’s evidence about the minimum level of contact under a long-term supervision order. (“In this regard, even the intensive supervision afforded to offenders under a long-term supervision order is not 24-hour supervision 7 day per week; but, instead, intensive supervision amounts to meeting with a parole officer twice per week, or eight times per month.”). The purpose of reviewing this evidence at this stage was to inform the sentencing judge’s determination of the threat posed by the appellant and whether the evidence of prospective treatment changed the likelihood of future risk.
          Later, at paragraphs 610-611 the sentencing judge re-stated that he accepted Dr. Hashman’s opinion and conclusions that the likelihood of managing the appellant’s risk with treatment remains poor. While the sentencing judge’s decision to accept Dr. Hashman’s opinion is afforded deference, the sentencing judge’s inquiry at the penalty stage cannot end there, nor can the inquiry merely adopt the earlier conclusion about the threat posed by the appellant. The sentencing judge was required to explain why the less severe sanctions would not adequately protect the public. He failed to provide any reasons justifying the indeterminate sentence in place of the less severe measures and failed to grapple with the evidence regarding the scope of treatment options available to the appellant.
          Evidence relating to how an offender may be monitored and controlled in the community is particularly salient at the penalty stage. For instance, in this case, the analysis did not address the evidence of Mr. Beasley, a community supervision parole officer with Correction Services Canada, to the following effect:

Dangerous offenders are assigned to an experienced parole officer, and there is a great deal of scrutiny of both the offender and the work of the parole officer assigned to monitor the dangerous offender.
Strict conditions around substance abuse can be imposed, including treatment while in custody, followed up through the Community Residential Facility (“CRF”) half-way houses and other residential treatment programming. Ongoing treatment may be coupled with an order not to use drugs or associate with certain individuals and more frequent urinalysis. 
Dangerous offenders can receive specialized programing for violence while incarcerated and if paroled, they can receive maintenance components for the treatment received, including further referrals and access to a psychologist.
Special conditions can be put in place to prohibit association with persons involved in the criminal subculture, including specific gangs. There are special monitoring procedures for prohibiting gang association, including regular collateral contact with friends and family and “very good communications with the police – including the Calgary Police ‘guns and gangs’ unit.”
Mental health management in the community includes a holistic approach involving supportive CRF residency conditions and ensuring the offender has their basic needs met, such as food and shelter. 
Someone newly released on a long-term supervision order would need to meet with him for the first three months on an “intensive” basis which would mean two contacts per week or eight contacts per month. Contact may exceed this amount, and there would also be contact with collaterals.
Dangerous offenders are subject to supervision once released for the rest of their lives. 
If there is a violation, the parole supervisor must determine if the risk remains manageable. A parolee is continuously monitored, and there is “no hesitation whatsoever in returning someone to custody” if the risk is not manageable.

          The evidence of Mr Beasley speaks to community management mechanisms in place for the appellant’s offender profile and appears to be relevant to some of the concerns said to underpin the need for an indeterminate sentence, such as persistent substance abuse, gang affiliation, repeated violence, and poor compliance with release conditions. There was also evidence that the appellant had taken steps to remove himself from gangs while incarcerated, that he was reclassified from maximum to medium security, and that he has not yet received any treatment for substance abuse. Assessment of this evidence would also form part of a thorough inquiry into future rehabilitation. 
          The decision at the penalty stage failed to thoroughly conduct the correct inquiry, which requires a conceptually distinct analysis from that conducted at the designation stage, and did not fully consider all the relevant evidence. These are errors of law that warrant appellate intervention.
Gladue factors in Dangerous Offender Sentencing
 
          Courts should be mindful when applying Gladue considerations at the second stage of a dangerous offender sentencing for Indigenous offenders. In particular, an important consideration at this stage is “the types of sentencing procedures and sanctions which may be appropriate in the circumstances for the offender because of his or her particular Aboriginal heritage or connection”: Gladue at para 66; R v Ipeelee, 2012 SCC 13 at para 59. 
          While public safety is the enhanced objective for dangerous offender sentencing (Boutilier at para 56), when an offender’s liberty is at stake to the extent that it is in dangerous offender proceedings, it is particularly important to undertake a robust analysis of the evidence. We recognize that public safety is paramount and Gladue factors may play a more limited role at the dangerous offender designation stage. However, Gladue considerations are highly relevant at the penalty stage when considering how culturally sensitive programming might enhance future rehabilitation and community control options: Zoe at paras 57-58. As this Court stated in Natomagan at para 123: 
[Gladue] recognized that a single judgment about sentencing will not correct the disadvantages experienced by many Indigenous people, including systemic bias in criminal justice. Nonetheless, since “sentencing judges are among those decision-makers who have the power to influence the treatment of aboriginal offenders in the justice system”, it was necessary to address “the limited role that sentencing judges will play in remedying injustice against aboriginal peoples in Canada.” As the crisis of over-incarceration worsens, it is necessary to address the roles played and tools used by all decision-makers who influence the deprivation of liberty of Indigenous offenders through any means, including sentencing, placement and parole.
          Here, the sentencing judge noted the various treatment options available to the appellant that emphasize Indigenous healing through traditional and cultural means (paras 544 and 578-579). At the designation stage, the sentencing judge concluded that these treatment options did not alter the appellant’s high risk of recidivism and intractability. At the penalty stage, the sentencing judge found that Gladue factors did not reduce the appellant’s overall blameworthiness or gravity of the predicate offence (para 606). But the sentencing judge failed to turn his mind to whether Gladue considerations could have a positive effect and improve the prospects of successfully managing the risk: Zoe at para 58 citing R v Moise, 2015 SKCA 39 at para 24.
V.    Conclusion
          The appeal is allowed. The matter is remitted back to the sentencing judge pursuant to s 759(3)(ii) of the Criminal Code to reconsider the sentence to be imposed on the appellant. The dangerous offender designation remains undisturbed. Given the passage of time, the parties may file updated information regarding the appellant in accordance with directions issued by the sentencing judge. 
