./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/ca/2023abca5.html
              The appellant and his co-accused were convicted of possession of a stolen Honda CR-V and of robbing a Toyota 4Runner. The appellant challenges his convictions on the basis that the verdicts were unreasonable. He also submits that the trial judge erred in applying the test for circumstantial evidence and in assessing party liability, and that the reasons for conviction were insufficient.
              The Crown concedes the appeal on the conviction for possession of the stolen Honda CR-V. The trial judge was mistaken when she concluded that the Crown had proved that the Honda CR-V was stolen because it had been identified by its Vehicle Identification Number. There was no evidence adduced about the Vehicle Identification Number.
Background 
              On June 12, 2019, undercover police were surveilling a third party when they observed the appellant, his co-accused (Ms Benedict), and two other people (Ms A and Mr S) in a Honda CR-V that had been identified as stolen. A number of officers in the Auto Theft Unit tracked the vehicle, on and off, for several hours. They were able to later identify the appellant as the driver of the Honda CR-V on two occasions that evening, once at 6:18 p.m. when he first entered the vehicle and then at 7:20 p.m. when he was fueling the vehicle at a gas station.
              Between approximately 8:35 p.m. and 9:00 p.m., police observed the Honda CR-V enter a Walmart parking lot and stop beside a Toyota 4Runner. The front passenger of the Honda CR-V, Ms A, exited and lifted the hood. The passenger in the rear driver’s side, Mr S, exited and appeared to be attempting to remove the Toyota 4Runner’s license plate. After abandoning this task, he re-entered the Honda CR-V. Ms Benedict then exited the Honda CR-V, closed the hood, and got back into the vehicle, after which the Honda CR-V left the parking lot. Police never identified the appellant during this time. 
              At around 9:30 p.m., police observed the Honda CR-V dropping off Ms Benedict in the Calgary neighbourhood of Copperfield. Ms Benedict met Mr Volciuc who was helping a friend sell a Toyota 4Runner. Mr Volciuc believed that Ms Benedict was acting for a potential buyer, her boyfriend. Ms Benedict took the Toyota 4Runner for a test drive and Mr Volciuc was in the passenger seat. Undercover police continued to surveil the vehicles and observed the Honda CR-V following the Toyota 4Runner. Helicopter Air Watch for Community Safety (HAWCS) was also tracking their movements. The Toyota 4Runner eventually drove eastbound on a dead-end gravel road near the outskirts of the city, with the Honda CR-V following behind. The Honda CR-V then turned around and started driving back the way it came, passing an undercover officer in an unmarked truck. The undercover officer was unable to identify the driver of the Honda CR-V. While in the Toyota 4Runner on the gravel road, Mr Volciuc saw a black truck in the rear-view mirror and given his discussion with Ms Benedict, it was assumed it was her boyfriend. In actuality, it was the undercover officer. Ms Benedict stopped the Toyota 4Runner and told Mr Volciuc that he had “to walk alone from here”. He complied as he was not sure if Ms Benedict’s boyfriend, who he believed may be in the truck, would hurt him and he feared for his life. Ms Benedict drove away in the Toyota 4Runner. The undercover officer approached Mr Volciuc and drove him back to Calgary.
              The appellant and Ms Benedict were arrested in the early morning of June 13, 2019. They were charged with several offences, including possession of stolen property with a value over $5,000 in relation to the Honda CR-V, and robbery of the Toyota 4Runner. 
              In convicting the appellant of robbery of the Toyota 4Runner, the trial judge relied on circumstantial evidence that the appellant continued driving the Honda CR-V after the police last identified him as the driver at around 7:20 p.m., several hours before Ms Benedict met Mr Volciuc. The trial judge concluded that even though the appellant was not in the immediate vicinity when the robbery of the Toyota 4Runner occurred, he was a party to the robbery because she inferred he drove Ms Benedict to Copperfield in the Honda CR-V, which facilitated the robbery. The trial judge also drew an inference that the appellant was operating the Honda CR-V while it drove in tandem behind the Toyota 4Runner, and that the driver of the Honda CR-V was working in concert with Ms Benedict as she drove the Toyota 4Runner.
Discussion
              When the Crown’s case depends on circumstantial evidence, in assessing whether a verdict is reasonable the question is whether the trier of fact, acting judicially, could reasonably be satisfied that the accused’s guilt was the only reasonable conclusion available on the totality of the evidence: R v Villaroman, 2016 SCC 33 at para 55.
              The Crown acknowledges that the only identification evidence of the appellant as the driver of the Honda CR-V occurred at 6:18 p.m. and 7:20 p.m. There is no evidence identifying him thereafter, including during the drive to Copperfield at approximately 9:30 p.m. or following Ms Benedict in the stolen Toyota 4Runner afterwards. 
          To convict the appellant of being a party to the robbery when the only identification of him occurred hours before the robbery is not the only reasonable conclusion on this record.  Given the gaps in the evidence, it was not a reasonable inference for the trial judge to conclude that the appellant was operating the Honda CR-V at the relevant times to ground his conviction for robbery. 
          We allow the appeal and set aside the convictions. The Crown submitted that the appropriate remedy for the charge of possession of stolen property is to order a new trial. In R v Ledesma, 2020 ABCA 411 at para 21, this Court held: 
Where an appeal is allowed on the ground of an error of law, the exercise of discretion to direct a new trial pursuant to s 686(2) depends on whether there was evidence upon which a properly instructed jury might have convicted. If there is no evidence of an essential element of the charge, the court will direct an acquittal because an accused shall not “be again placed in jeopardy after the Crown has failed to prove his guilt in order to give the Crown another opportunity to convict him”: R v NW, 2013 ABCA 393 at para 17 citing R v More (1959), 1959 CanLII 447 (BC CA), 124 CCC 140 (BC CA) at 149-150, 31 CR 59.
          In our view, the appropriate remedy on both charges is to enter acquittals. 
