MARTIN J.

I. INTRODUCTION

This decision is one of a series of similar decisions issued across the country dealing with Parliament’s repeal of jury selection peremptory challenges under s. 634 of the Criminal Code, for both the Crown and defence.  The new law came into effect on September 19, 2019.

Despite being readily foreseeable that the repeal would be contentious, and challenged in court, Parliament did not clarify by express wording whether the repeal of peremptory challenges was to apply retrospectively to all jury cases in the system, or prospectively only to charges filed after September 19, 2019.  Had Parliament done so, the retrospective/prospective issue would have been moot; certainty and finality would have been assured.

This is of no small moment, as errors in a jury selection process can often result in a trial being nullified and having to be repeated; wasting the original trial, inconveniencing or losing witnesses who have to be found and testify again, adding delay and generally increasing the strain the judicial system operates under daily.  Not to mention that jury trials often involve the most serious crimes tried in our system, including for instance all manner of murder and sexual assault.

I am aware of five decisions dealing with this issue to date.  Predictably, given the nature of a specific application, the circumstances, the evidence led and the analysis by the judge, the judgments do not all reach the same conclusion.  Three in Ontario found the repeal and new law is retrospective, while one case in each New Brunswick and British Columbia found the changes prospective.  No Court of Appeal has yet weighed in.  This decision is the first in Manitoba.

As a bit of a roadmap, I will briefly describe the legislative changes, the resulting issue, some Canadian jury trial context, and the circumstances of this case.  I will then review the five decisions that have been made across the country and then proceed with an analysis to determine whether the repeal affects a substantive right and as such should be applied prospectively or is purely procedural and should be applied retrospectively.

II.THE CHANGES

Bill C-75 (the “Bill”) was an omnibus bill dealing with many changes to the Criminal Code, referred to as the Act, and related Acts.  It received Royal assent in June 2019.  Section 269 of the Bill specified:

269. Sections 633 and 634 of the Act are replaced by the following:

Stand by

633. The judge may direct a juror who has been called under subsection 631(3) or (3.‍1) to stand by for reasons of personal hardship, maintaining public confidence in the administration of justice or any other reasonable cause.

Of note, challenge for cause provisions were also modified by doing away with “triers” and in its place empowering the jury selection judge to fulfill that function.

When the Bill was introduced in 2018, a Charter Statement was provided.  The portion addressing changes to the peremptory challenge provisions explained:

The Bill would amend the Criminal Code to abolish peremptory challenges, empower the judge to decide all challenges for cause, and enact other measures to strengthen the jury selection regime.

… The elimination of peremptory challenges from the Criminal Code may engage the fair trial rights of the accused as protected by sections 11(d) and 11(f) of the Charter.

The following considerations support the consistency of this measure with the Charter.

The Charter requires trial by an independent and impartial decision-maker and protects the right to an impartial and representative jury. The Supreme Court has held that challenges for cause are an essential safeguard of the accused’s right to a fair and impartial jury. As an unlimited number of challenges for cause remain to eliminate potential jurors who are not capable of acting impartially in a given case, the accused’s fair trial rights are protected.

III. THE ISSUE

Here, the original application was filed by Mr. Soroush.  All accused have since joined in.

They sought orders that:

(i) in the absence of s. 634, the 35 peremptory challenges that were available to each accused at common law be granted; and

(ii) the repeal of s. 634 was a breach of the Charter rights of all accused, notably the right to life, liberty and security of the person (s. 7), the right to a fair and public hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal (s. 11(d)) and right to the benefit of a trial by jury (s. 11(f)).  Related to this ground, they requested relief under s. 24(1) that the old Code peremptory challenges be reinstated.

The application morphed at the oral hearing.  The accused no longer sought a definitive ruling of a Charter breach (which had recently been denied in an Ontario case), nor the 35 peremptory common law challenges, but rather refined their argument to the retrospective/prospective issue.  Ultimately, this was the only issue I was asked to rule on, albeit in the context of the asserted Charter breaches and validity of the common law.

Further, to be clear, the two other changes -- that jury selection judges deal with stand bys, or stand asides, to “maintaining public confidence in the administration of justice or any other reasonable cause”, and the judge’s new function to decide the challenges for cause -- were not addressed and as such I will not deal with them.

IV. JURY TRIALS IN CANADA

As jurors and parties are told at the outset of a jury trial, trial by jury is a cornerstone of Canadian democracy.  Its genesis is the British common law system.  Much of what comprised the juror challenge system developed in the 16th and 17th centuries in England.  But the peremptory challenge was older yet, dating to the 14th century, about the year 1300, when a person charged with a felony was allowed 35 peremptory challenges by common law.  Fast forwarding hundreds of years, in 1892 Canada incorporated peremptory challenges into its Criminal Code.  The number of statutory peremptory challenges stayed the same since, for 127 years, until its repeal, effective September 19, 2019.

Sir William Blackstone, Knight, Commentaries on the Laws of England, William Draper Lewis ed., vol. 4 (Philadelphia: Geo T. Bisel Co., 1922) at pp. 353 and 1738, is repeatedly cited for the historical context of peremptory challenges.  Blackstone explained it is “a provision full of that tenderness and humanity to prisoners for which our English laws are justly famous.”  It has two basis: (1) that the law ensures that a defendant will not be tried by any individual in whom he perceives a prejudice, even if the defendant is unable to show the bias; and (2) the fear that unsuccessfully challenging such a person for cause may leave a defendant concerned for any ill-feeling he perceives the process may instill to the person challenged.  As such, a peremptory challenge allows a party to dismiss a person from serving on the jury without providing any reason.

[Clearly, the basis of a peremptory challenge is purely subjective and always has been.  As noted for instance by the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Bain, 1992 CanLII 111 (SCC), [1992] 1 S.C.R. 91 at para. 56: “As no objective showing need be made, it is clear that either side may exercise the right to exclude a juror on considerations of partiality.”  The court reaffirmed that the peremptory challenge was meant to “give each party the right to remove individuals “whom he does not believe to be impartial.” (para. 62).  To be clear, both the Crown and accused were entitled to equal peremptory challenges.

[Further at paras. 112, 116 and 143 the dissenting Justices made several foundational observations:

The well-informed observer certainly knows that a jury should be impartial, representative and competent.  He or she will also know that the random selection process that leads to the formation of a panel of prospective jurors naturally fosters these three qualities, but that it does not in and of itself guarantee them.  Procedures exist through which parties are granted a limited possibility of affecting jury selection to further any of these characteristics ... 

. . . .

[The accused has no right to a jury of his or her choice, however, as was recognized by the majority of this Court in Sherratt, supra.  As long as the jury selection process produces an impartial jury, the accused has no claim to any greater influence on the jury than is given him or her by this process.  He or she cannot positively choose the jury, but the law allows him or her to exclude prospective jurors from it.

. . . .

In the end, the 12 members of the jury, who have withstood the selection process, are the ones who matter in examining whether a reasonable apprehension of bias arises.  The accused, as well as the Crown, had the opportunity to exclude them somehow as they were called, if they had any doubt on their fitness to serve as jurors.  To the observer, this feature of the jury selection process not only does not give rise to an apprehension of bias, but rather increases the perception that the jury is impartial, since the accused and the Crown have had a chance to weed out the jury.

(emphasis added)

Jumping ahead 20 years, in R. v. Davey, 2012 SCC 75, [2012] 3 S.C.R. 828 (QL), the court said it this way at paras. 31 and 32:

Challenges for cause and the court vetting process in ss. 626  to 644  of the Criminal Code  are designed to ensure a jury that is eligible, impartial and competent.  Subsequent to the amendments to the jury selection process following this Court’s decision in R. v. Bain, 1992 CanLII 111 (SCC), [1992] 1 S.C.R. 91, neither party has the right to select a jury, or has the positive power to shape a jury.  Jurors are selected at random, and randomness ensures representativeness:  R. v. Sherratt, 1991 CanLII 86 (SCC), [1991] 1 S.C.R. 509, at p. 525.  As officers of the court, all counsel have a responsibility to uphold the Charter  right, as guaranteed by s. 11 (d) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms , to an independent and impartial jury.  Either party can challenge a juror for cause, based on objective grounds.

However, the Criminal Code  gives the parties a limited opportunity to object to specific jurors chosen from the jury list.  Peremptory challenges can be exercised on purely subjective grounds.  Crown counsel, as local ministers of justice, exercise that choice on behalf of the public.  The alternating order and equal number of peremptory challenges give both the Crown and the defence an equal opportunity to object to a limited number of potential jurors to address any other concerns regarding suitability or concerns that may fall short of proof of partiality.  Our post-Bain jury selection process ensures equality of influence over the composition of the jury as between the parties.

(emphasis added)

In the companion case of R. v. Yumnu, 2012 SCC 73, [2012] 3 S.C.R. 777 (QL), the court observed that the jury selection scheme was meant to avoid a jury being partial to one side or the other.  Further, and more importantly, it was designed “ … to make good on the constitutional promise, enshrined in s. 11(d) … ” of the Charter of the right to be tried by an independent and impartial tribunal (para. 72).

The impetus to change hundreds of years of legal practice seems to have been a not guilty verdict in early 2018, where a Caucasian man charged with killing an Indigenous man appeared to have used a number of peremptory challenges to exclude some Indigenous persons from the jury.  Ignoring the basic and robust presumption that the jury acted according to the trial judge’s instructions of law, which would have included to apply the law without prejudice or bias, the verdict caused tumult.  The reaction among some parliamentarians was to re-ignite the call for a ban on peremptory challenges, ostensibly to avoid discrimination in jury selection.  Thus the repeal of s. 634, and the amendment of various other jury selection processes, was born and then passed by Parliament as it rose to enter an election phase in June 2019.

V.  THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE ACCUSED

The four accused in this matter were arrested and charged with first degree murder for a killing that took place in Winnipeg on August 13, 2017.  In May 2018, a direct indictment was preferred transferring the case to the Court of Queen’s Bench, denying the accused of a preliminary inquiry in the provincial court that they otherwise would have been entitled to.  At the first pre-trial conference in this court, in July 2018, a month-long jury trial was scheduled for November 2019, with jury selection set for October 31.  There was nothing unusual or unique in setting these dates.  Had the court schedule been able to accommodate it, the case could also have been heard in the spring of 2019.

By the former s. 634, and because the charge is first degree murder, each accused would have been entitled to 20 peremptory challenges to prospective jurors.  The Crown would have an aggregate of 80 peremptory challenges to equal the total number of challenges available to all accused.  This process, while seemingly considerable or cumbersome, normally does not turn out to be so in practice.  It has been routinely employed in many cases of first degree murder with multiple accused without significant difficulty in selecting a jury.

As well, unlike many charges where an accused may choose the mode of trial, either a judge alone or a judge and jury, first degree murder charges mandate a trial by judge and jury unless the Crown consents to the accused’s re-election to trial by a judge without a jury.  Here, three accused have signaled their preference to be tried by a judge alone, while one is not so inclined.  As a result, the trial must be heard by a judge and jury.  To be clear, the Crown says it would consent to re-election, but by law all four accused would need to request this.

VI. THE FIVE DECISIONS

I am aware that five decisions have been released to this point respecting the retrospective/prospective issue.  A concise summary would be beneficial.  So, chronologically by release date in September 2019, I note:

• R. v. Lako, 2019 ONSC 5362, [2019] O.J. No. 4666 (QL) (September 17):

The Court referred to Supreme Court of Canada’s decision in R. v. Dineley, 2012 SCC 58, [2012] 3 S.C.R. 272, for the test of whether new legislation should be applied retrospectively or prospectively.  After reviewing other key cases dealing with principles inherent to jury selection, and a number of cases dealing with changes involving substantive rights or procedural amendments, the court ultimately summed up that an accused does not have the right to a favourable jury or to an unbiased jury; the requirement of the jury selection system was that it result in a fair trial (para. 32).  While the accused had an expectation they would have peremptory challenges, “Expectations, however, do not create rights.” (para. 34).  The court concluded that the repeal of s. 634 did not impair fair trial rights or the requirement to be judged by an independent and impartial tribunal, in part because of the remaining safeguards in the jury selection system.  The repeal was to be applied retrospectively.

Finally, in obiter, the court also concluded that peremptory challenges only vest when an accused entered his plea before the jury, or was placed in the charge to the jury.  So, although the accused were charged in 2012, any vested right in peremptory challenges, only vested on September 23, 2019, the day of jury selection and as such the new law applied.

• R. v. Subramaniam, 2019 BCSC 1601, [2019] B.C.J. No. 1800 (QL) (September 20):

Considering the Interpretation Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. I-21, the test in Dineley, the history of peremptory challenges and the scheme of the old and new jury selection process, including reasons for the change, the court found that the repeal of s. 634 affected a substantive right, and would be applied prospectively.  In determining whether a peremptory challenge was substantive or procedural, the court noted that Parliament, rightly or wrongly, would have understood by its accompanying Charter Statement the potential for an accused’s Charter rights to be “engaged” by the elimination of peremptory challenges (para. 32).  Not resting its decision on this point, the court engaged in a Dineley substantive/procedural analysis.  At para. 44 the court stated:

…The amendment is not limited to the enforcement, use or presentation of a right. Its subject matter is the negation of a right. The amendment eliminates peremptory challenges entirely. What has historically been regarded as a right so fundamental to the process of jury selection that even depriving an accused of a single peremptory challenge is sufficient grounds to set aside a guilty verdict and order a new trial, is being done away with. The peremptory challenges provisions of the Code are procedural, in the sense that they prescribe a method to be followed to secure an accused their Charter right to a jury trial. But the right to peremptory challenges itself has been so fundamental to Canadian criminal law, and is so deeply entrenched, that it must be regarded, standing on its own, as a substantive right.

Obviously, the court also expressly disagreed with the Lako decision.  The court differentiated the precedents, where courts had found new legislation was procedural, primarily based on the subject matter at issue.  And, the court held that Mr. Subramaniam’s earlier election of judge and jury would have included an expectation of peremptory challenges and hence in making his election as he did, his rights vested then.

• R. v. Raymond, 2019 NBQB 203, [2019] N.B.J. No. 271 (QL)

(September 23):

This 98-page decision is the most extensive discussion of the jury selection process.  Ferguson J. considered all the changes to the new jury selection process.  He defined the issue broadly as whether the jury selection amendments that (i) eliminated peremptory challenges (ii) allowed the trial judge to decide challenges for cause and (iii) broadened the power of the judge to stand aside a juror, constituted an interference with substantive or vested rights rather than being purely procedural changes that affect the manner in which those rights are asserted or enforced (para. 31).  In the end, the court found the amendments affected substantive rights and should be applied prospectively.  Of note, Ferguson J. observed:

- that peremptory challenges have been “seemingly accorded the status of a substantive and fundamental right”.  In R .v. Ward, 1972 CanLII 713 (ON CA), [1972] 3 O.R. 665 (ONCA) at pp. 517-518, the accused was denied a peremptory challenge after an unsuccessful challenge for cause.  The Ontario Court of Appeal stated (at para. 55 of Raymond):

… Thus, the appellant has been deprived of a substantial and fundamental right to be tried by tribunal properly constituted in accordance with the provisions of the Criminal Code resulting in a denial of his right to a fair and proper trial. …

- the selection of a jury engages both s. 11(d) and (f) of the Charter, in the sense contemplated in Dineley (paras. 95 and 109);
- the totality of the amendments “alter in a fundamental way” the jury that would be chosen, by disempowering an accused and expanding the trial judge’s role to shape the jury (paras. 100, 105 and 106); and
- rules of statutory interpretation, including when Charter rights may be affected or engaged, favour finding the changes affect substantive rights (paras. 93 and 107 – 109).

• R. v. Chouhan, 2019 ONSC 5512, [2019] O.J. No. 4797 (September 24):

This is the only decision addressing directly whether the amendments breach ss. 7, 11(d) or (f) Charter rights.  McMahon J. assessed five safeguards in place to ensure an independent and impartial jury.  These included: (i) representativeness of the jury panel; (ii) randomness of selection of the jury panel and petit jury; (iii) challenges for cause; (iv) the judge’s discretion to excuse prospective jurors; and (v) the judge’s discretion to stand aside, or stand by jurors.  The court concluded that the safeguards adequately ensured constitutionally enshrined rights and denied the Charter challenge (paras. 43 – 59).  As to the retrospective/prospective analysis, the court endorsed the Lako decision.

• R. v. Khan, 2019 ONSC 5646, [2019] O.J. No. 4918 (September 30):

The court effectively endorsed Lako and Chouhan, albeit relying on other arguments as well.

VII. ANALYSIS

The starting point for any analysis is applying principles of statutory interpretation and the test of whether a law affects substantive rights or is only procedural.  As referenced in the other cases dealing with this issue, the seminal case for understanding both concepts is Dineley.

Statutory Interpretation

In Dineley, the Supreme Court set out the presumptions at play in determining the retrospective/prospective analysis.  Deschamps J., for the majority, framed it this way at para. 10:

•courts have long recognized that the cases in which legislation has retrospective effect must be exceptional, particularly where it affects either a substantive or vested right;

•new legislation that affects substantive rights will be presumed to have only prospective effect unless it is possible to discern a clear legislative intent that it is to apply retrospectively; and

•new procedural legislation designed to govern only the manner in which rights are asserted or enforced does not affect the substance of those rights.  Such legislation is presumed to apply immediately to both pending and future cases.

Cromwell J. (dissenting, but not on this point) referred to Ruth Sullivan, Sullivan on the Construction of Statutes, 5th ed (Markham, Ont.: LexisNexis Canada Inc., 2008) and explained the meaning and rationale of ss. 43 and 44 the Interpretation Act:

The first is s. 44 . It provides that where a former enactment is repealed and a new enactment is substituted for it, proceedings taken under the former enactment are to be continued in conformity with the new enactment.  It further provides that “the procedure established by the new enactment shall be followed as far as it can be adapted thereto … in the enforcement of rights, existing or accruing under the former enactment, and … in a proceeding in relation to matters that have happened before the repeal”: s. 44 (c) and (d)(ii) and (iii).  As Professor Sullivan puts it, “[t]hese provisions call for the immediate application of new procedural law to all actions, including those that were pending when the legislation came into force”: R. Sullivan, Sullivan on the Construction of Statutes (5th ed. 2008), at p. 698.

The second provision is s. 43 .  It provides that the repeal of an enactment does not affect any “right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued, accruing or incurred” under it: s. 43 (c).  As Professor Sullivan puts it, the repeal does not destroy any right or liability arising under the repealed enactment, i.e. “the repealed law continues to apply to pre-repeal facts for most purposes as if it were still good law” (p. 708).

Professor Sullivan sums up the cumulative effect of these two provisions as follows: “ … the application of new substantive law is delayed by the survival of repealed law [but] the application of new procedural law is not” (p. 698).

(emphasis added)

There is little room for debate that when discussing the retrospective effect of procedural law, the court was referring to “purely procedural” law (paras. 44 and 47).

In her most recent text, Ruth Sullivan, Sullivan on the Construction of Statutes, 6th ed (Markham, Ont.: LexisNexis Canada Inc., 2014), at 25.11, p. 754, Professor Sullivan comments that “[c]urrently transitional law in Canada is in a state of confusion” and “has become something of a morass.”  She notes the underpinnings of transitional law as (s. 25.6, pp. 752-53):

The most compelling concern underlying transitional law is the rule of law and the values served by the rule of law – certainty, predictability, stability, rationality, and formal equality.  One of the great virtues of law is that it provides a stable framework within which people can carry on their activities. … Principles of fairness are also important.  Finally, there is the traditional common law commitment to protecting private law rights.

While I need go no further for purposes of this case, I note that there are four terms generally used to describe the temporal application of statutes: retroactive, retrospective, immediate, and prospective.  Professor Sullivan commented that these distinct terms often remain a source of confusion, although the Supreme Court sought to bring clarity in Épiciers Unis Métro-Richelieu Inc., division “Éconogros” v. Collin, 2004 SCC 59, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 257 (Sullivan, ss. 25.12 – 25.24).

Professor Sullivan summarized the temporal application of laws at s. 25.25, pp. 760-61.  Of importance here, she notes the following presumptions:

. . .

2. … the legislature does not intend legislation to be applied retrospectively unless the legislation confers a benefit or was enacted to protect the public.

The weight of this presumption is unclear, but the better view is that it is variable, depending on factors such as the nature of the disadvantage imposed by the legislation and the degree to which imposing it would be arbitrary or unfair.

3. … the legislature does not intend to interfere with vested rights.

The weight of this presumption varies depending on factors such as the nature of the protected right and how unfair or arbitrary it would be to abolish or curtail the right.  Often the presumption is rebutted without reference to express legislative language.

. . .

5. … the legislature intends procedural legislation to apply immediately to pending or ongoing proceedings.

(emphasis added for convenience)

Professor Sullivan concludes that while the summary is reasonably clear, in practice it can be difficult to apply.  “ … Apart from unclear terminology, there is the inherent difficulty of situating facts and effects in time in a principled way.”

Finally, she had this to say about fairness (s. 25.9):

In assessing the temporal application of legislation, another major consideration is fairness.  It is unfair to establish rules, invite people to rely on them, then change them in mid-stream, especially if the change results in negative consequences.  Change that could, or should, have been anticipated by those affected at the time of reliance is less objectionable than totally unpredictable change.  Similarly, change that confers advantages on those affected is less objectionable than change that is purely or mostly detrimental.

Discussion

Against all this backdrop, and with great respect for the Ontario decisions, I find that the repeal of s. 634, peremptory challenges, must, as a matter of fairness and statutory interpretation, be considered to have immediate but prospective application because it affects substantive rights.  In other words, I find it applies forward to charges laid on or after its effective date of September 19, 2019.

Before setting out my reasons, I note that the test articulated by Deschamps J. in Dineley is whether the new law “affects” substantive rights.  Cromwell J. used other descriptors including “alters” or “interferes” or “impairs” or “deprives” or “impinges”.  It is unnecessary to engage in an analysis whether the repeal of s. 634 more narrowly “impaired” a substantive right or more broadly “affected” such a right.  Either way, the taking away or eliminating a right is the most absolute and complete way to affect, alter, interfere or impair it.  More important to this analysis is whether peremptory challenges were a substantive right.

The distinction between substantive rights and procedural mechanisms is not crisp but certain hallmarks can tilt the evaluation.  In Dineley the majority commented that “… new procedural legislation designed to govern only the manner in which rights are asserted or enforced does not affect the substance of those rights.” (para. 10).  Further, in the context of that case, new legislation affecting the content or existence of a defence, as opposed to the manner of its presentation, indicates a substantive right (para. 16).  Cromwell J. expanded on this, cautioning that an analysis of whether a change affects a substantive right is not a matter of looking at its form, but also at its function and effect (para. 55); i.e. does it alter the character or legal effect of any transaction (para. 66).  All italics are mine for emphasis.

I acknowledge my reasons include those relied on by Saunders J. in Subramaniam and Ferguson J. in Raymond.  All in, the reasons I find a peremptory challenge is a substantive right include:

•without placing undue emphasis on it, peremptory challenges have been a feature of jury trials for about 700 years.  They were firmly ingrained and relied upon, not as a privilege or point of process but as an entitlement or power or right;
•the origin of peremptory challenges was a matter of fairness to an accused to offset, somewhat, the power of the state prosecuting him;
•the arbitrary or subjective basis of peremptory challenges were historically seen as an affirmation of trial fairness by giving an accused (and the Crown) a limited role in weeding out jurors he perceived may be biased or impartial.  Critically, his perception was enough; he did not have to justify it.  This explanation supporting impartiality has been acknowledged by the Supreme Court of Canada (Bain at para. 62, quoting R. v. Cloutier, 1979 CanLII 25 (SCC), [1979] 2 S.C.R. 709).

As also summarized by the Ontario Court of Appeal in R. v. Gayle, 2001 CanLII 4447 (ON CA), [2001] 54 O.R. (3d) 36, at paras. 59 and 60:

An important part of the jury selection process is the right of both the Crown and the defence to exercise peremptory challenges. …

By offering each side a limited number of peremptory challenges, the law allows the parties to eliminate unprovable but perceived concerns about the propensities of jurors and thereby enhance confidence in the impartiality of the jury and the fairness of the trial.

•related to the above points, the challenge was seen as enhancing the perception of a fair trial, which has been regarded as critical; not only that an accused receive a fair trial but that he be seen to do so;
•as in Gayle, in ample jurisprudence, the entitlement of exercising a peremptory challenge has regularly and repeatedly been described as a right, or a personal right, of challenge (Cloutier pp. 714 – 27; Bain paras. 56, 62 and 70; and Davey at para. 39).  While I do not suggest describing it as a right is determinative per se, it nonetheless is emblematic of how the peremptory challenge has been construed and regarded.  It was always seen as more than just a point of process;
•the peremptory challenge was a long-standing facet of an accused’s role in the trial.  It was not that he could have a jury of his choice, but through this unchecked power to reject some jurors, he could have a direct say, or influence, over the composition of the jury that would decide his fate.  Any seasoned onlooker would agree that this power was crucial to an accused.  I pause to note that this is materially different than the stand by or challenge for cause changes in the new law.  An accused did not have a role in a decision to stand by or in a decision of the triers as to whether a prospective juror was acceptable or not;
•the fundamental importance of peremptory challenges has also been recognized repeatedly in a most critical way.  Courts, including the Supreme Court, have nullified trials where a peremptory challenge was denied to an accused.  Cloutier affirmed that an accused need not show prejudice from such an error; the error itself is sufficient for a new trial to be ordered.  I also note the comments of Cromwell J. in R. v. Kokopenace, 2015 SCC 28 at paras. 294 – 299, that a properly constituted jury is not a technicality.  At para. 295 he stated:

In McLean v. The King, 1933 CanLII 38 (SCC), [1933] S.C.R. 688, the Court stated: “. . . in the administration of criminal justice nothing is more important than that the constitution of the jury should be free from all objection and that the accused should have the full advantage of every safeguard which the law has provided to enable him to secure this right, which is of the very essence of a fair trial” (p. 692 (emphasis added)).

•the requirements of fair, independent and impartial trials are constitutionally guaranteed rights.  Yet these attributes have been values of Canadian criminal law since well before the Charter.  Even Parliament recognized in the Charter Statement accompanying introduction of Bill C-75 that the repeal of peremptory challenges “may engage the fair trial rights of the accused as protected by sections 11(d) and 11(f) of the Charter”, although it argued that challenges for cause were sufficient to protect an accused and guarantee his Charter rights;

Clearly, a right need not rise to the level of a constitutional right to be considered a substantive right.  But, to loop back, peremptory challenges were recognized as promoting fair and impartial trials and thus it should not be difficult to see that they affect such Charter rights;

•as noted, the changes take away the peremptory challenge entirely, as opposed to modifying it in some fashion; and finally
•there is an arbitrariness to the retrospectivity argument in that the cut-off is a point-in-time, September 19, 2019; again, bearing in mind that the accuseds were already charged and engaged in the judicial process when the changes came about.  Thus, it is solely a fluke of timing that determines which side of September 19, 2019 a case falls on, and with it the power or right to exclude some jurors an accused sees as biased.

Further, here three accused have no choice but to proceed with a jury and as such are unable to rearrange their legal affairs to account for a change in the law that took place after they were arrested.

I find that the statutory provisions of peremptory challenges available to these accused when they were charged with this offence was a substantive right, it was more than just a manner of or procedure for asserting other trial rights.  It was understood as a fundamental precept of jury trials, a protection for an accused for good and valid reasons.  Its repeal did not just affect the right, it took away the right itself, gutting its content and substance.  I fail to see how this change is procedural only.  To return to the hallmarks gleaned from Dineley, repeal of peremptory challenges does not govern only the manner in which rights are asserted, it affects the content and existence, function and effect, of peremptory challenges and the jury selection process itself.  It alters the character and legal effect of an accused’s role in jury selection.

A few final matters.

I am mindful that other Commonwealth jurisdictions have abolished peremptory challenges.  That however is not to say that peremptory challenges were not a substantive right.  Parliament is supreme and properly done can abolish or do away with peremptory challenges, and indeed they said they wanted to.  However they did not do that.  Unlike Britain, Canada did not abolish, by clear language in the legislation, peremptory challenges but rather it simply repealed the provision, leading to the present quagmire.

Given the scope of the application as narrowed and argued at the oral hearing, I leave it to another court to determine whether common law peremptory challenges have, through the language of this repeal, been resurrected.  In any event, that would only apply to charges arising after September 19, 2019, as those before then still have the benefit of prospective application of the new law.  I also note the difference of opinion between Subramaniam and Lako respecting vested rights.  Given my finding, I need not deal with that issue.

Further, to be clear, my conclusion is not tied to the other changes in the jury selection process dealing with standbys and challenges to cause.  By itself, the repeal of peremptory challenges affects an accused’s substantive rights.

Finally, I should by this decision not be seen to be expressing any view of Parliament’s policy decision to take away peremptory challenges.  All I am saying is that peremptory challenges need be seen for what they are, an important feature of jury trials and a substantive power, or right, exercised freely by accuseds and the Crown alike for hundreds of years.  Parliament has not made it sufficiently clear that the timing of abolishing peremptory challenges was to be retrospective.

Consistent with the presumption against retrospectivity in statutory interpretation, the change must be prospective.

VIII.  CONCLUSION

The accused’s application is allowed to the extent that the repeal of s. 634 of the Criminal Code applies only to charges laid on and after September 19, 2019.
