IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF MANITOBA

Coram:
Madam Justice Diana M. Cameron
Madam Justice Jennifer A. Pfuetzner
Madam Justice Karen I. Simonsen

Judgment delivered: February 16, 2023

pfuetzner JA

[1] The accused pleaded guilty to trafficking three kilograms of methamphetamine to an undercover police officer contrary to section 5(1) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, SC 1996, c 19.
[2] The sentencing judge sentenced the accused to one day in custody (noting enhanced credit of eight months for time in pre-sentence custody) and three years going forward of supervised probation.
[3] The Crown seeks leave to appeal and, if granted, appeals the sentence, arguing that the sentencing judge committed a number of errors and imposed a sentence that is grossly unfit for this offence and this offender.
[4] For the reasons that follow, I would grant leave to appeal and allow the appeal.  I would vacate the sentence imposed and sentence the accused to 44 months’ incarceration, less enhanced credit of eight months for pre-sentence custody.  I would not stay execution of the sentence.

Background

[5] The trafficking offence to which the accused pleaded guilty was a one-time transaction occurring on October 29, 2019 that he facilitated on behalf of other individuals that he knew in the drug trade.  Upon his arrest on December 4, 2019, the accused was found in possession of 164.5 grams of cocaine, over $50,000 in cash and drug-trafficking paraphernalia.  He conceded that he was a mid-level dealer in cocaine although he also maintained employment.
[6] After nearly six months in custody, the accused was released on bail to Adult & Teen Challenge of Central Canada (Teen Challenge) where he stayed for about 18 months prior to the sentencing.  By all accounts, he thrived at Teen Challenge and took significant steps towards rehabilitation, including taking on a leadership role and being a dedicated worker at the Lighthouse Mission.  He has expressed interest in becoming a pastor.
[7] On August 5, 2020, the accused’s counsel obtained a psychiatric report from Dr. Jeffrey Waldman (Dr. Waldman).  The report was sought for the purpose of assessing the accused’s mental status and, if he had a mental illness, determining if it affected his ability to give instructions to counsel.
[8] Dr. Waldman diagnosed the accused with a delusional disorder, noting that he had “developed paranoid and grandiose beliefs over the last 15 months but ha[d] not experienced hallucinations or disorganized thinking.”  He also diagnosed cocaine use disorder and alcohol use disorder, both in sustained remission in a controlled environment.
[9] With respect to the specific purpose of the assessment, Dr. Waldman stated:
. . .
. . . [H]is delusional beliefs are impacting on his ability to appreciate the potential outcome of court proceedings, as he believes that God has sent him messages that he will be acquitted despite the evidence against him.  As such, he is unable to provide instructions to his lawyer that are not consistently based on delusions rather than being able to communicate with his lawyer regarding the facts of the case.  . . .
[10] With treatment, these issues abated prior to the sentencing hearing.
[11] By agreement of the accused and the Crown at the sentencing hearing, the sentencing judge took into account, as aggravating, the items in the accused’s possession on arrest and his admission that he was a mid-level cocaine dealer, both of which indicated that he was well-entrenched in the drug trade.  As a result of this agreement, the Crown was relieved of its obligation to prove these aggravating facts beyond a reasonable doubt (see section 724(3)(e) of the Criminal Code (the Code)).
[12] The Crown argued that the accused’s rehabilitation could reduce what would otherwise have been an eight-year sentence down to between 6.5 and seven years.  It submitted that, if the sentencing judge found exceptional circumstances (which it argued against), the sentence could be further reduced to 5.5 years.  The accused suggested that the appropriate sentencing range was four to five years but that his rehabilitation demonstrated exceptional circumstances, warranting a probationary sentence of three years.
[13] In assessing the accused’s moral culpability, the sentencing judge took into account the fact that he was selling drugs for profit as indicative of high intentional risk-taking and significant consequential harm.  She also found that:
. . .
. . .  [He] was suffering from a delusional disorder at the time of the incident, as well as an addiction to both drugs and alcohol.  It was to help feed this addiction that led him to the life that he was leading at the time.  When I read Dr. Waldman’s report, I am told that the delusions themselves are connected to drug trafficking or criminal type lifestyle.  So although high, [the accused]’s moral culpability is reduced by the extraordinary issues he faced at the time.
. . .

[emphasis added]

[14] The sentencing judge recognized that sentences for trafficking in hard drugs must emphasize denunciation and deterrence.  Nonetheless, she considered the accused’s rehabilitative efforts to be “exceptional” and his moral culpability to be “unique”.
[15] Ultimately, the sentencing judge found that there existed “exceptional circumstances that would reduce an otherwise lengthy sentence greatly”.  She sentenced the accused to one day in custody (noting enhanced credit of eight months for time in pre-sentence custody) and three years going forward of supervised probation.  A condition of his probation was that he continue to live and work at Teen Challenge.

Positions of the Parties

[16] The Crown submits that the sentencing judge made several errors that resulted in the imposition of an unfit sentence.  It is not necessary to address all of the alleged errors in order to dispose of the appeal.  I will deal with the Crown’s arguments that the sentencing judge erred in finding reduced moral culpability in the absence of a connection between the accused’s mental health challenges and his offending behaviour; in finding exceptional circumstances when none existed; and in imposing a sentence that failed to give paramountcy to denunciation and deterrence.
[17] The accused argues that his circumstances and the extent of his rehabilitation are truly exceptional and that this finding by the sentencing judge is entitled to deference, as is the sentence imposed.  He also asserts that the sentencing judge was entitled to find that his delusional disorder played a role in his offending behaviour and that a non-custodial sentence can have a denunciatory and deterrent effect.

Analysis

Standard of Review

[18] There is no question that appellate courts are reluctant to intervene in sentencing decisions.  The deferential standard of review to be applied was described by Mainella JA in R v Houle, 2016 MBCA 121 (at para 11):

The law affords a sentencing judge great latitude in tailoring a sentence to the offence and the offender (R v Ipeelee, 2012 SCC 13 at para 38, [2012] 1 SCR 433; and R v Nasogaluak, 2010 SCC 6 at paras 43-46, [2010] 1 SCR 206).  Accordingly, the threshold for appellate intervention with a sentence is “very high” and limited only to situations of material error or where the sentence is demonstrably unfit (section 687(1) of the Code and R v Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64 at para 52, [2015] 3 SCR 1089).  A material error has two qualities beginning with demonstration of an error in principle, such as an error in law, a failure to consider or give sufficient weight to a relevant factor, consideration of an irrelevant factor or an overemphasis of an appropriate factor.  The second aspect is that the error must have impacted the sentence in more than just an incidental way (see Lacasse at para 44).  Where the error is harmless, as it has “no real effect” on the sentence, appellate intervention is not permitted (Lacasse at para 45).  A sentence will be demonstrably unfit where it unreasonably departs from the principle of proportionality taking into account the individual circumstances of the offence and the offender and the acceptable range of sentence for similar offences committed in similar circumstances (see Lacasse at paras 52-55; and R v Ruizfuentes (HS), 2010 MBCA 90 at para 7, 258 ManR (2d) 220).

Relevant Principles of Sentencing

[19] As denunciation and deterrence are the primary sentencing principles in respect of drug trafficking offences, the characteristics of the offender necessarily take a back seat to the circumstances of the offence (see R v Johnson, 2020 MBCA 10 at para 13).  The facilitation of a methamphetamine deal at the kilogram level potentially attracts a sentence in the range of eight to 12 years (see R v Grant (IM), 2009 MBCA 9 at paras 107‑8; and R v Bisson, 2018 MBCA 92 at para 4).  However, the imposition of a sentence below a typical range or starting point does not make the sentence unfit so long as it is proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the circumstances of the offender. 
[20] The concept of exceptional circumstances is “nebulous and devoid of a precise definition” (R v Tran (A), 2015 MBCA 120 at para 17).  In my view, a finding of exceptional circumstances is, functionally, a description of the significant, usually multiple, mitigating circumstances that, in the usual case, will make a non-custodial sentence proportionate for an offence that commonly results in a lengthy period of incarceration.  It is only in rare cases where truly exceptional circumstances are to be found (see R v Burnett, 2017 MBCA 122 at paras 27-29).
[21] As this Court has previously explained, a properly diagnosed mental illness does not result in an automatic reduction in moral blameworthiness for sentencing purposes.  A fact-specific determination has to be made in each case as to whether the mental illness “impacted the commission of the offence in question” (R v JMO, 2017 MBCA 59 at para 72).

Application of the Principles to the Present Case

[22] Here, the sentencing judge relied on her finding of exceptional circumstances to justify a sentence well below what one would expect considering only the facts relating to the offence.  Her finding was based on the combination of what she found to be the accused’s reduced moral culpability due to his mental health diagnosis and his significant rehabilitation since his arrest.
[23] Dr. Waldman’s report was not commissioned to assess whether there was a link between the accused’s mental health and the offence, nor does it suggest such a link.  The only connection mentioned by Dr. Waldman is that the accused’s “pattern of substance use did contribute to the circumstances that led to his charges” (emphasis added).  That said, the accused was not trafficking drugs solely to feed an addiction.  He was also motivated by and did profit.
[24] Dr. Waldman’s report indicates that the accused’s “perception [was] that he began to experience detailed premonitions and began noting coincidences that had special meaning to him, which he believed were direct communications to him from God, in [the] spring of 2019.”  The accused reported to Dr. Waldman that he “did not understand the purpose of these premonitions until he was in custody” after his arrest.  He believed that “God [wa]s guiding him for a special mission that he [had] yet to discover” and came to believe that he would not be convicted for his charges “so that he c[ould] pursue missionary work and help others.”  There is no indication that the accused’s delusions led in any way to his decision to facilitate a three-kilogram methamphetamine transaction.  In fact, the accused was unable to attribute any meaning to the delusions until after his arrest.
[25] In my respectful view, the sentencing judge committed one of the errors in principle warned against in JMO:  “assuming an offender’s moral blameworthiness for an offence is reduced automatically because he or she has a mental illness or other cognitive limitation” (at para 73).  In addition, the sentencing judge failed to properly assess the evidence in respect of the accused’s delusional disorder and its relationship with his criminal conduct.  The record does not reasonably support the sentencing judge’s conclusion that “the delusions themselves [we]re connected to drug trafficking or criminal type lifestyle.”  Although the accused need not establish that his delusional disorder caused the offending behaviour, the accused did not meet his burden of demonstrating that it contributed to that behaviour (see R v JED, 2018 MBCA 123 at paras 68-78).  As a result, the sentencing judge made a material error in her finding that the accused’s moral culpability was reduced and was “unique”.
[26] Compounding this situation is my conclusion that the sentencing judge also unreasonably overemphasized the principle of rehabilitation at the expense of the principles of denunciation and deterrence.  In my view, both of these errors had an impact on the sentence as they led the sentencing judge to her finding that exceptional circumstances existed when they did not.
[27]   Ultimately, the sentence imposed is demonstrably unfit and offends the overriding principle of proportionality.  It now falls to this Court to re-sentence the accused.  In concluding that the sentence must be varied, I have taken into account the conditions of the accused’s probation order and the period for which they were imposed (see section 683(7) of the Code).

Determination of a Fit Sentence

[28] Deference is owed to those of the sentencing judge’s findings that are not tainted by error.  The primary mitigating factor identified by the sentencing judge is the very significant steps the accused has taken to rehabilitate himself and to make reparations to the community harmed by his offending.  She also found that his cocaine use disorder and alcohol use disorder were mitigating.  Despite the accused not selling drugs to feed an addiction, Dr. Waldman’s report indicates at least some limited connection between his substance abuse and his offending.

[29] The Crown argues that, all else being equal, a fit sentence for this offence would be eight years, but that it should be reduced to six years due to the accused’s rehabilitation.  From this sentence, the Crown submits that recognition should be given to the accused’s time on probation since the sentencing and the eight months of enhanced credit for time in pre-sentence custody, for a reduction of one year.  In any event, the Crown suggests that the absolute floor for the sentence should be four years due to parity concerns—other offenders convicted in the same project were sentenced to four years and had significantly less involvement than the accused.
[30] The accused asserts that the six-year sentence sought by the Crown is excessive.  He suggests that a fit sentence, not considering rehabilitation, would be 3.5 to four years but that his extensive rehabilitation necessitates a conditional sentence order or a stay of execution of reincarceration.
[31] I agree with the Crown that, but for the accused’s rehabilitation, a sentence of about eight years would be fit.  The accused’s moral culpability is high and the aggravating factors significant.  At the age of 31, the accused was trafficking drugs for profit while gainfully employed and living with his mother.  He amassed cash and acquired other assets, such as vehicles.  As aptly observed by the sentencing judge, “methamphetamine is a scourge on our society.”
[32] However, the extent of the accused’s rehabilitation and the time he has devoted to helping others is highly mitigating.  In light of the accused’s rehabilitation and the effect of his substance-use disorders, I would impose a sentence of four years.  I would, in addition, reduce the sentence by four months in recognition of the time he has spent towards completing his probationary sentence.  Therefore, the sentence will be 44 months’ incarceration.  As noted by the sentencing judge, the accused should be credited with eight months of enhanced credit for pre-sentence custody.
[33] I am not persuaded that the accused has met the burden to demonstrate that it is in the interests of justice to stay execution of the custodial portion of his sentence.  In my view, reincarceration is required because of the seriousness of the offence, the length of the sentence remaining to be served, and the importance of denunciation and deterrence (see R v McMillan (BW), 2016 MBCA 12 at para 36; and Burnett at para 40).

Conclusion

[34] In the result, I would grant leave to appeal and allow the appeal.  I would vacate the sentence imposed by the sentencing judge and sentence the accused to 44 months’ incarceration, less eight months’ enhanced credit for pre-sentence custody.  All other orders of the sentencing judge remain in place (weapons prohibition, DNA sample and forfeiture of all items seized).
