./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ca/scc/2023scc3.html
                            This appeal questions whether the mandatory minimum sentences for robbery imposed in s. 344(1)(a)(i) and (a.1) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C‑46, constitute cruel and unusual punishment under s. 12 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Specifically, Mr. Hilbach challenges the minimum of five years’ imprisonment prescribed under s. 344(1)(a)(i) where a robbery is committed with a restricted or prohibited firearm, arguing that it is a grossly disproportionate sentence in regards to his circumstances. Mr. Zwozdesky relies on a set of hypothetical scenarios to challenge the minimum of four years’ imprisonment previously imposed by s. 344(1)(a.1) where an ordinary firearm is used. The mandatory minimum sentence prescribed in s. 344(1)(a.1) was repealed after this appeal was heard. Despite this legislative change, these reasons examine the impugned mandatory minimum as previously enacted.
                            In the companion appeal R. v. Hills, 2023 SCC 2, this Court affirmed and developed the framework applicable to challenges to the constitutionality of a mandatory minimum sentence under s. 12 of the Charter. Whether a mandatory minimum is grossly disproportionate will depend upon the scope and reach of the offence, the effects of the penalty on the offender, and the penalty and its objectives. Under this rubric, classic features of offences that lie at either end of the spectrum can be discerned and may provide guidance. For example, some offences, while potentially very serious, can be committed in a wide range of circumstances by a wide range of offenders, including circumstances that are all but innocuous and offenders who are all but morally blameless. As such, they fall within a class of offences for which mandatory minimum sentences are particularly vulnerable to being struck down under s. 12 of the Charter as cruel and unusual punishment. This is so because the prescribed mandatory minimum punishment may, in some instances, be so severe and the effects so pronounced, that it results in a grossly disproportionate sentence to the appropriate sentence in a given case (see, e.g., Hills; R. v. Smith, 1987 CanLII 64 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 1045; R. v. Nur, 2015 SCC 15, 1 S.C.R. 773; R. v. Lloyd, 2016 SCC 13, 1 S.C.R. 130).
                            By contrast, some offences that may carry with them significant mandatory minimum sentences, such as four to five years of imprisonment, are framed in such a way that they cannot be committed in innocuous circumstances by offenders who are all but morally blameless. On the contrary, they are almost always serious and committed by offenders who bear a high degree of moral blameworthiness. Offences that come within this class are narrowly defined and limited in scope, subject and mens rea. They regularly involve acts of violence, threats of violence, or conduct that is inherently dangerous, in circumstances that give rise to a real risk of death or serious bodily harm. Additionally, they require a high level of moral blameworthiness on the part of offenders, be they principals or parties, to sustain a conviction.
                            For this class of offences, the mandatory minimum sentence could, applying normal sentencing principles, be considered to be too high and demonstrably unfit in some cases. For these offences there is, however, little risk of imposing a sentence that would meet the test for gross disproportionality so long as the mandatory minimum sentence is not grossly disproportionate to sentences that would be appropriate, applying normal sentencing principles, for conduct that could reasonably be expected to fall within its ambit (see, e.g., R. v. Morrisey, 2000 SCC 39, 2 S.C.R. 90; R. v. Ferguson, 2008 SCC 6, 1 S.C.R. 96; R. v. McDonald (1998), 1998 CanLII 13327 (ON CA), 40 O.R. (3d) 641 (C.A.); R. v. Lapierre (1998), 1998 CanLII 13203 (QC CA), 123 C.C.C. (3d) 332 (Que. C.A.); R. v. McIvor, 2018 MBCA 29, 5 W.W.R. 139).
                            Of course, not all offences will fall neatly into one or the other of these two classes of offences, and they are not intended to establish any preconditions. Rather, these categories may serve as departure points when deciding whether a particular mandatory minimum sentence is or is not constitutional.
                            This appeal, and its companion appeal, provide classic examples of these two classes of offences. In Hills, the impugned provision imposed a mandatory minimum of four years’ imprisonment for an offence that can be committed in a wide range of circumstances by a wide range of offenders. By contrast, the present offence is narrowly defined and limited in scope, subject and mens rea. The impugned mandatory minimum sentences apply to conduct that poses a significant risk to the safety of victims and the public. The risk of violence and psychological trauma from any robbery involving a firearm is acute. Unlike the offence that was subject to the mandatory minimum sentence at issue in Hills, the spectrum of conduct captured by robbery with a firearm is not so wide that the minimums apply in circumstances that involve little danger or moral fault.
                            Applying the framework in Hills, I conclude that neither s. 344(1)(a)(i) nor the former s. 344(1)(a.1) are grossly disproportionate. In enacting the mandatory minimum sentences here, Parliament was free to prioritize deterrence and denunciation. Accordingly, I would allow the appeal in respect of each provision.
II.            Legislative Background
                             The respondents bring challenges under s. 12 of the Charter to the mandatory minimum sentences prescribed in s. 344(1)(a)(i) and (a.1) of the Criminal Code. The mandatory minimum sentences at issue arise from the commission of the offence of robbery contrary to s. 343 of the Criminal Code. Section 343 of the Criminal Code defines four ways that the offence of robbery can be committed:
343 Every one commits robbery who
 
(a) steals, and for the purpose of extorting whatever is stolen or to prevent or overcome resistance to the stealing, uses violence or threats of violence to a person or property;
 
(b) steals from any person and, at the time he steals or immediately before or immediately thereafter, wounds, beats, strikes or uses any personal violence to that person;
 
(c) assaults any person with intent to steal from him; or
 
(d) steals from any person while armed with an offensive weapon or imitation thereof.
                            While there are four ways in which robbery may be committed, the actus reus and mens rea requirements make robbery rather distinct: as an offence, it combines an offence against property with one against the person, despite the fact it is included in Part IX of the Criminal Code, “Offences Against Rights of Property”. In terms of actus reus, the use of violence or force is a prerequisite to a conviction under s. 343(a) to (c), and s. 343(d) requires that the offender be “armed” with an “offensive weapon”. Moreover, three of the four ways in which robbery may be committed (s. 343(a), (b) and (d)) require actual stealing. Its elements thus tend to restrict the offence to a relatively narrow range of serious conduct, which is generally treated severely in sentencing (M. Manning and P. Sankoff, Manning, Mewett & Sankoff: Criminal Law (5th ed. 2015), at ¶22.59).
                        As for its mental elements, robbery carries a double mens rea requirement. First, the offender must intend to use violence or force, and in the case of s. 343(d) intend to carry the offensive weapon in question (R. v. Pelletier (1992), 1992 CanLII 12794 (QC CA), 71 C.C.C. (3d) 438 (Que. C.A.), at pp. 441-42; R. v. Strong (1990), 1990 ABCA 327 (CanLII), 111 A.R. 12 (C.A.), at para. 33; R. v. Nadolnick, 2003 ABCA 363, 339 A.R. 348, at para. 21; R. v. Roberts, 2016 NLTD(G) 18, 377 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 174, at paras. 152-54). Second, whether the robbery involved actual stealing (s. 343(a), (b) and (d)) or simply an intent to steal (s. 343(c)), the offender must have had the requisite mens rea for theft given that s. 2 of the Criminal Code defines “steal” as “to commit theft”. The mens rea requirement for theft involves a fraudulent intent, an absence of any colour of right over the property, and the intent to deprive an owner of their property (Lafrance v. The Queen, 1973 CanLII 35 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 201; R. v. Dorosh, 2003 SKCA 134, 8 W.W.R. 613, at para. 14).
                        Aside from s. 343(d), s. 343 does not create a distinct offence of “armed robbery”. However, where a firearm is used in a robbery under any of the modes in s. 343, s. 344(1) is engaged. Specifically, where a restricted or prohibited firearm is used, an offender is subject to a mandatory five-year term of imprisonment in the case of a first offence (s. 344(1)(a)(i)). Before recent amendments to the Criminal Code were enacted in 2022, where the firearm was neither restricted nor prohibited, a mandatory four-year term of imprisonment applied (s. 344(1)(a.1)):
344 (1) Every person who commits robbery is guilty of an indictable offence and liable
 
(a) if a restricted firearm or prohibited firearm is used in the commission of the offence or if any firearm is used in the commission of the offence and the offence is committed for the benefit of, at the direction of, or in association with, a criminal organization, to imprisonment for life and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of
 
(i) in the case of a first offence, five years, and
 
(ii) in the case of a second or subsequent offence, seven years;
 
(a.1) in any other case where a firearm is used in the commission of the offence, to imprisonment for life and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of four years; and
 
(b) in any other case, to imprisonment for life.
                        A question which affects the scope of the impugned section arises as to whether s. 344(1) is an offence-creating provision or whether it relates to sentencing alone (R. v. Watson, 2008 ONCA 614, 240 O.A.C. 370, at para. 24; R. v. D. (A.), 2003 BCCA 106, 173 C.C.C. (3d) 177, at para. 30). While nothing turns on this issue here, based on its wording and origins, Parliament appears to have modeled s. 344(1) on s. 85(1) of the Criminal Code, which makes it an offence to commit an indictable offence using a firearm, and s. 85(3), which previously prescribed a mandatory minimum punishment of one year of imprisonment. The mandatory minimum sentences in s. 344(1) must be interpreted similarly to s. 85(1) as a result. Section 85(1) reads as follows:
Using firearm in commission of offence
 
85 (1) Every person commits an offence who uses a firearm, whether or not the person causes or means to cause bodily harm to any person as a result of using the firearm,
 
(a) while committing an indictable offence, other than an offence under [certain sections, including] 344 (robbery) . . . .
                        Before s. 344’s enactment, robbery with a firearm was typically prosecuted by charging an offender with a principal offence, for example armed robbery under the former s. 302, and s. 83 (the then equivalent of s. 85, using a firearm in the commission of the robbery offence; see, e.g., Lapierre; R. v. Covin, 1983 CanLII 151 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 725). Section 85(1) was enacted to ensure stiff penalties for offences commonly committed with firearms, like robbery (s. 85(3) of the Criminal Code; McGuigan v. The Queen, 1982 CanLII 41 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 284, per Dickson J. (as he then was), at pp. 316-17 and 319, referring to the former s. 83).
                         However, in 1995, after s. 344 was enacted, robbery was exempted from the list of indictable offences that could ground a conviction under s. 85(1) (Firearms Act, S.C. 1995, c. 39, ss. 139 and 149). Evidently, Parliament concluded that a penalty even harsher than the one-year minimum term prescribed by s. 85(3) was warranted where a firearm was used to commit robbery. Section 85’s text reinforces the conclusion that it served as the model for s. 344, considering the language of the two provisions is similar. Specifically, s. 85(1) refers to a “person . . . who uses a firearm . . . while committing an indictable offence”, while s. 344(1) applies where firearms are “used in the commission of [robbery]”.
                        Given Parliament modelled s. 344 on s. 85, the “use” of a firearm ought to be defined consistently across ss. 344 and 85. In R. v. Steele, 2007 SCC 36, 3 S.C.R. 3, this Court observed that an offender “uses” a firearm within the meaning of s. 85(1) where the weapon is in the physical possession of the offender or readily at hand, and “to facilitate the commission of an offence or for purposes of escape, the offender reveals by words or conduct the actual presence or immediate availability of a firearm” (para. 32 (emphasis in original)).
                         The requirement to “use” a firearm further narrows the scope of s. 344(1)(a)(i) and (a.1) and applies only where a firearm is used to threaten violence or force in a robbery. Mere possession of a firearm does not constitute “using” a firearm (Steele, at paras. 25-28). This precludes, for instance, the mandatory minimum sentences from applying where an offender merely possessed the firearm and was technically “armed” within the meaning of s. 343(d). Moreover, “use” implies a degree of subjective fault. The offender must intend to use the firearm while committing, or escaping after committing, the offence (R. v. Purcell, 2007 ONCA 101, 220 O.A.C. 207, at paras. 16-18).
                        In addition, s. 344 incorporates the definition of a “firearm” in the Criminal Code, as well as the terms “prohibited firearm” and “restricted firearm”. A “firearm” is defined at s. 2 to mean “a barrelled weapon from which any shot, bullet or other projectile can be discharged and that is capable of causing serious bodily injury or death to a person”. “Prohibited firearms” and “restricted firearms” are two specific classes of firearms subject to strict regulation under both the Firearms Act and the Criminal Code. Prohibited firearms include short-barrelled handguns, sawed-off rifles and shotguns, and automatic firearms (Criminal Code, s. 84(1); Nur, at para. 7). The possession of a prohibited firearm is unlawful, unless the individual possessed the firearm before the prohibition coming into force (Firearms Act, s. 12; Nur, at para. 7). Restricted firearms are “inherently dangerous and are commonly used in criminal activity”. They include any handgun that is not a prohibited firearm, some semi-automatic firearms, and some firearms that are less than a specified length (Nur, at para. 7; Criminal Code, s. 84(1)).
                         Firearms that are neither prohibited nor restricted fall into a residual category of firearms that can be possessed with fewer constraints. This residual category includes ordinary firearms, like hunting rifles, that are subject to the licensing regime in the Firearms Act. Others are exempted from the Firearms Act under s. 84(3) of the Criminal Code, owing to their reduced muzzle velocity. Some exempted firearms include air-powered devices like paintball guns and BB guns. These air-powered devices constitute “firearms” within the meaning of the Criminal Code since they can still cause serious bodily injury (Hills, at paras. 13-14). The distinctions within Canada’s regulatory scheme for firearms underlie the arguments advanced by the parties before this Court on the constitutionality of the mandatory minimums.
                        Having set out the legislative background of the mandatory minimum sentences at issue, I turn to the facts and judicial history that led to this appeal.
III.         Judicial and Legislative History
A.           R. v. Hilbach, Alberta Court of Queen’s Bench, 2018 ABQB 526, 75 Alta. L.R. (6th) 359
                         On June 9, 2017, Mr. Hilbach and a 13-year-old accomplice robbed a convenience store in Edmonton with an unloaded sawed-off rifle. With his face concealed, Mr. Hilbach pointed the rifle at two employees and demanded cash while his accomplice punched one employee and kicked the other. They left with $290 in lottery tickets and were apprehended shortly after. At the time of the offence, Mr. Hilbach was 19 years old, on probation, and subject to a firearms prohibition order, having been convicted of and sentenced for several other offences 3 months earlier. In January 2018, Mr. Hilbach pleaded guilty to robbery using a prohibited firearm contrary to s. 344(1)(a)(i) of the Criminal Code and to violating s. 117.01(1) of the Criminal Code, which makes it an offence to possess a firearm while prohibited from doing so by a court order. At sentencing, Mr. Hilbach brought a challenge under s. 12 of the Charter to the five-year mandatory minimum sentence imposed pursuant to s. 344(1)(a)(i). Mr. Hilbach claimed the impugned provision was grossly disproportionate in his particular circumstances as an offender before the court. 
                        Mr. Hilbach is Indigenous. He is a member of the Ermineskin Cree Nation. Before the sentencing judge, Mr. Hilbach filed a pre-sentence report and Gladue report, which established that his family had a history of residential school attendance, struggled with addictions to alcohol or other substances, and suffered financial difficulties. He has a Grade 10 education, had worked in the construction industry, and was working with an organization for youth and young adults at risk of gang involvement and criminal activity. He has a daughter, who was 18 months old at the time of sentencing. He acknowledged an alcohol addiction and a criminal record for several offences, including uttering threats, assault, mischief, and breaches of recognizance. His personal history is marked by physical abuse, family violence, chronic unemployment, and gang involvement.
                        The sentencing judge decided that a fit and proportionate sentence for Mr. Hilbach was two years less a day. In assessing gross disproportionality, the sentencing judge concluded that while the gravity of the offence was high, and deterrence and denunciation were important, the effects of a five-year penitentiary sentence were “severe”, as a longer sentence increased the likelihood of “a life of criminal and other anti-social behaviour” (para. 14). Mr. Hilbach’s rehabilitation was best served with a short period of incarceration. Further, his youth was mitigating and Gladue factors contributed to the offence. The most basic was Mr. Hilbach’s poverty, which prompted his actions and related to systemic factors that led to lower incomes among Indigenous peoples. The sentencing judge was satisfied these considerations would justify a sentence less than the three-year starting point established by the Alberta Court of Appeal for unsophisticated armed robbery for commercial outlets in R. v. Johnas (1982), 1982 ABCA 331 (CanLII), 41 A.R. 183. Since a five-year sentence was more than double a fit and proportionate sentence, and because a penitentiary sentence was “qualitatively” different, he concluded that the mandatory minimum sentence was grossly disproportionate (para. 43). The Crown made no argument under s. 1 of the Charter, so the sentencing judge declined to consider it (para. 5).
B.            R. v. Zwozdesky, Alberta Court of Queen’s Bench, 2019 ABQB 322, 95 Alta. L.R. (6th) 386
                         On September 13, 2016, Mr. Zwozdesky and two masked accomplices robbed a convenience store in Caslan, Alberta. One of the accomplices pushed an employee, pointed a sawed-off shotgun at her, and demanded cash. A shot was fired into a shelf. Mr. Zwozdesky was not the principal offender. He did not enter the store during the robbery, but drove the vehicle that brought his accomplices to and from the store. Mr. Zwozdesky pleaded guilty to robbery with a firearm contrary to s. 344(1)(a.1) of the Criminal Code, as well as a charge of robbery contrary to s. 344(1)(b) of the Criminal Code arising from a second incident. At sentencing, Mr. Zwozdesky brought a challenge under s. 12 of the Charter to the four-year mandatory minimum sentence in s. 344(1)(a.1).
                         Mr. Zwozdesky was almost 56 years old at sentencing. He had a Grade 9 education and no criminal record. He was injured in several motor vehicle accidents, the last significant one having occurred in 2000. As a result, he suffered severe post‑traumatic cognitive dysfunction, fibromyalgia, nerve damage and chronic pain and was incapable of working. To manage his pain, he relied on prescription drugs, along with hard and soft illegal drugs. He had no memory of the robbery on September 13, 2016, as he was under the influence of drugs. The sentencing judge found he may have participated in the robberies to support his addictions that resulted from chronic pain.
                         The sentencing judge concluded that the impugned mandatory minimum sentence was not grossly disproportionate for Mr. Zwozdesky, since a sentence of three to four years was fit and proportionate for his offence. She went on to conclude, however, that the mandatory minimum sentence was grossly disproportionate in reasonably foreseeable hypothetical scenarios. Armed robberies could be committed in a wide variety of circumstances and by a wide range of offenders. The minimum sentence could be grossly disproportionate where offenders were young, Indigenous and/or suffering from addiction issues. In support of this conclusion, the sentencing judge referenced R. v. Hilbach, 2018 ABQB 526. As the Crown made no submissions under s. 1 of the Charter, the sentencing judge declined to consider whether the infringement was justified in a democratic and free society and declared s. 344(1)(a.1) of no force and effect. Having struck down the mandatory minimum sentencing provision, she sentenced Mr. Zwozdesky to three years’ imprisonment for robbery with a firearm.
C.            Alberta Court of Appeal, 2020 ABCA 332, 14 Alta. L.R. (7th) 245
                         The Alberta Court of Appeal heard the Crown’s appeals in Mr. Hilbach’s and Mr. Zwozdesky’s cases together. The majority, Strekaf and Feehan JJ.A., dismissed the Crown’s appeals on the constitutionality of the mandatory minimum sentence provisions, but added a year to Mr. Hilbach’s sentence. Wakeling J.A. wrote in dissent, concluding that both mandatory minimum sentence provisions were constitutional and the sentences imposed on each offender were inadequate.
                         The majority concluded that a sentence of two years less a day was demonstrably unfit for Mr. Hilbach and instead concluded three years’ imprisonment was a fit and proportionate sentence. Three years was the starting point for convenience store robberies established in Johnas, and a sentence of this length suited the gravity of Mr. Hilbach’s offence. In going below three years’ imprisonment, the sentencing judge had overemphasized Mr. Hilbach’s Gladue factors and placed insufficient weight on deterrence and denunciation, as well as the offence’s aggravating factors. However, s. 344(1)(a)(i) was still grossly disproportionate in Mr. Hilbach’s case, as it precluded considering mitigating factors and elevated “denunciation and deterrence to such an extent as to minimize objectives of rehabilitation, the imposition of a just sanction, and special considerations for Indigenous offenders” (para. 53).
                         The majority agreed with the sentencing judge that three years’ imprisonment was a fit and proportionate sentence for Mr. Zwozdesky and declined to interfere with his sentence as a result. The majority, however, also agreed s. 344(1)(a.1) was grossly disproportionate in five reasonably foreseeable scenarios, including where the offender was young, Indigenous, suffering from mental health issues and addiction, and committed the robbery with an air-powered pistol. In these scenarios, the mandatory minimum might be more than double a fit and proportionate sentence. The Crown did not advance an argument to save the legislation under s. 1 of the Charter.
                        Wakeling J.A. in dissent would have set aside the declarations that ss. 344(1)(a)(i) and 344(1)(a.1) are grossly disproportionate. Wakeling J.A. reiterated his view, expressed in R. v. Hills, 2020 ABCA 263, 9 Alta. L.R. (7th) 226, that this Court’s s. 12 jurisprudence is unsound and ought to be revisited. Even so, Wakeling J.A. noted that these are not “one of those extraordinary cases” (para. 89) that satisfies the test for gross disproportionality developed in Smith. Wakeling J.A. would have also increased Mr. Hilbach’s and Mr. Zwozdesky’s sentences beyond the mandatory minimums.
                         In September 2021, Mr. Zwozdesky passed away after the Court granted leave to the Crown to appeal. After Mr. Zwozdesky’s counsel applied to continue the appeal pursuant to s. 76 of the Supreme Court Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. S-26, the Court granted standing to his counsel to appear as amici curiae under r. 92 of the Rules of the Supreme Court of Canada, SOR/2002-156.
D.           Legislative Amendments
                        After leave to appeal was granted, Parliament introduced and passed An Act to amend the Criminal Code and the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, S.C. 2022, c. 15. The legislation received royal assent on November 17, 2022, and repealed the mandatory minimum sentence prescribed in s. 344(1)(a.1). When an ordinary firearm is used to commit robbery, it no longer attracts a mandatory minimum. While I acknowledge this legislative change, these reasons examine the provision as previously enacted with the applicable mandatory minimum terms. The parties do not rely on Parliament’s choice to repeal this measure in their arguments and as such, I will not address this issue further.
IV.         Issue
                         The issue on this appeal is whether the mandatory minimum terms of imprisonment prescribed in s. 344(1)(a)(i) and (a.1) of the Criminal Code infringe s. 12 of the Charter.
V.           Analysis
                         In the reasons for judgment in Hills, rendered simultaneously with this case, this Court reiterated the well-established s. 12 framework and provided further clarity as to how it applies in respect of a challenge to a mandatory minimum sentence provision. I begin with a brief restatement of those principles before applying those principles in this appeal.
A.           The Test for an Infringement of Section 12
(1)          The Framework
                        Determining whether the mandatory minimum sentences for robbery are grossly disproportionate requires a two-stage inquiry. A court must first determine a fit and proportionate sentence for the offence having regard to the objectives and principles of sentencing in the Criminal Code (Hills, at para. 40; R. v. Bissonnette, 2022 SCC 23, at para. 63; R. v. Boudreault, 2018 SCC 58, 3 S.C.R. 599, at para. 46; Nur, at para. 46). The court must then ask whether the impugned provision requires it to impose a sentence that is grossly disproportionate when compared to the fit and proportionate sentence (Hills, at para. 40; Bissonnette, at para. 63; Nur, at para. 46; Smith, at p. 1072). This two-part assessment may proceed on the basis of either (1) the actual offender before the court, as it will for Mr. Hilbach, or (2) another offender in a reasonably foreseeable case, as proposed by Mr. Zwozdesky (Hills, at para. 41; Bissonnette, at para. 63; Nur, at para. 46).
                         At both stages of the analysis, courts are called upon to be scrupulous (Hills, at paras. 50-52). Analytical rigour at the first stage, and fixing as specific a sentence as possible, ensures that the comparative exercise at the second stage is not distorted. In some cases, the evaluation of gross disproportionality may be more apparent where the fit sentence fixed at the first stage is not carceral in nature — for example, where it would have involved probation rather than imprisonment as was the case in Hills (para. 156). But the same principled process of comparison applies when comparing terms of imprisonment to determine if and when the length of a carceral sentence becomes grossly disproportionate.
                        The framework for the second stage of the s. 12 analysis is outlined in the companion case, Hills, beginning at para. 122, and involves consideration of the scope and reach of the offence, the effects on the offender, and the penalty. Either one component alone or the combination of multiple components may lead to a finding of gross disproportionality. Mandatory minimum penalties that capture a range of conduct of varying gravity and differing levels of offender culpability will be constitutionally suspect (Hills, at para. 125; Lloyd, at para. 24; Boudreault, at para. 45; Smith, at p. 1078). The broader the scope of the offence, the more likely the mandatory minimum may prescribe a grossly disproportionate term of imprisonment on conduct that involves low risk to public safety and low moral culpability (Hills, at para. 125; Nur, at para. 83). In these circumstances, the minimum penalty is more likely to capture conduct that is grossly disproportionate.
                         At the second component, courts must also take into account the impacts that the mandatory minimum may have on the individual offender. This analysis requires an inquiry into how the punishment may affect the actual or reasonably foreseeable offender — both generally and based on their specific characteristics and qualities (Hills, at para. 133). Offender characteristics including Indigeneity, race, gender, age and mental health factors may be relevant to this component (Hills, at para. 135).
                        The third component requires an analysis of the penalty imposed under the mandatory minimum (Hills, at para. 138). Courts must assess the severity of the sentence imposed and ask whether the prescribed penalty goes beyond what is necessary to achieve Parliament’s sentencing objectives “having regard to the legitimate purposes of punishment and the adequacy of possible alternatives” (Smith, at pp. 1099-1100). Parliament may mandate sentences according to its punishment objectives, including those of denunciation and deterrence, within constitutional limits. However, no individual sentencing objective can be applied to the exclusion of all others (R. v. Nasogaluak, 2010 SCC 6, 1 S.C.R. 206, at para. 43). Rehabilitation must form part of the calculus of all criminal punishment, as a punishment that completely disregards rehabilitation is incompatible with human dignity (Bissonnette, at para. 85; Hills, at para. 141). Courts should examine whether there are alternatives to the mandatory penalty that would also fulfill Parliament’s sentencing objectives. Where a mandatory minimum provides no discretion to impose a sentence other than imprisonment where imprisonment is not required, the penalty will be constitutionally suspect and require careful scrutiny (Hills, at para. 144). All punishment should be considered in light of the principles of parity and proportionality (R. v. Friesen, 2020 SCC 9, 1 S.C.R. 424, at paras. 32-33; Hills, at para. 145).
(2)          Mandatory Minimum Sentences and Indigenous Offenders
                        Section 718.2(e) of the Criminal Code provides mandatory direction to consider the unique situation of Indigenous offenders for all offences in sentencing (R. v. Gladue, 1999 CanLII 679 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 688, at para. 93; R. v. Ipeelee, 2012 SCC 13, 1 S.C.R. 433, at paras. 84-85). It directs that “all available sanctions, other than imprisonment, that are reasonable in the circumstances should be considered for all offenders, with particular attention to the circumstances of Aboriginal offenders.” The principles relating to the consideration of Gladue reports are settled: these considerations must be applied in all cases where they are relevant, including where the offence charged is serious. Sentencing judges must consider the unique systemic or background factors which may have played a part in bringing the particular Indigenous offender before the courts and the types of sentencing procedures and sanctions which may be appropriate in the circumstances for that offender (Ipeelee, at paras. 59-60).
                        Certain parties and interveners raised questions regarding the way Indigeneity should factor into the s. 12 analysis of gross disproportionality. The Attorney General of Ontario, for instance, submitted that it should be treated as a “generic” mitigating circumstance that is excluded from the scope of reasonable hypotheticals. These arguments were rejected in Nur when the Court found “the inquiry into reasonably foreseeable situations the law may capture may take into account personal characteristics relevant to people who may be caught by the mandatory minimum” (para. 76).
                        When engaged, s. 718.2(e) applies at three different parts of the analysis.
                        First, in conducting a s. 12 analysis, courts must consider Gladue when sentencing the individual offender. The failure to consider Gladue factors is an error that can lead to a finding that a sentence is unfit (Ipeelee, at paras. 86-87). Hence, where the offender is Indigenous, like Mr. Hilbach, a court will necessarily need to take into account Gladue principles in order to fix a sentence that is fit and proportionate at the first stage.
                        Second, a court may consider scenarios involving Indigenous offenders in crafting reasonably foreseeable hypotheticals (Hills, at para. 86). Given the statistics concerning the imprisonment of Indigenous persons, it is reasonably foreseeable that a hypothetical offender could be Indigenous, and the consideration of a hypothetical offender’s Indigeneity, in the context of a reasonable hypothetical scenario, aligns with the imperative statutory guidance provided by Parliament in s. 718.2(e). Indigenous people dealing with poverty, precarious housing, or disabilities and addictions appear with “staggering regularity in our provincial courts” and are therefore reasonably foreseeable (Boudreault, at para. 55).
                         Lastly, Indigeneity is relevant at the second stage of the s. 12 inquiry. This Court has long affirmed that the assessment of whether a mandatory minimum sentence is grossly disproportionate depends, in part, on its reflection of valid penal purposes and recognized sentencing principles (Boudreault, at para. 48; Smith, at p. 1072; R. v. Goltz, 1991 CanLII 51 (SCC), 3 S.C.R. 485, at p. 500; R. v. Latimer, 2001 SCC 1, 1 S.C.R. 3, at para. 86; Morrisey, at para. 28). Gladue’s framework for applying s. 718.2(e) has been a core part of Canada’s sentencing principles since 1999. The methodology called for under s. 718.2(e), as well as the norms it embodies, are well-established components of our sentencing jurisprudence, as much as parity and proportionality. Section 718.2(e) is necessarily relevant in a s. 12 framework that requires courts to assess the effects of mandatory minimum sentences in light of sentencing norms and objectives. Moreover, as Boudreault illustrates, the impact of a punishment on Parliament’s objectives in s. 718.2(e) can support striking down a sentencing measure under s. 12. Accordingly, there is no reason to exclude consideration of s. 718.2(e) of the Criminal Code from either stage of the gross disproportionality framework.
                        The types of considerations that may be raised under s. 718.2(e) in a s. 12 challenge to a mandatory minimum sentence include, for instance, whether a probationary sentence would have otherwise been a valid alternative to incarceration as a result of Gladue principles. Or, as in Boudreault, the effects of a sentencing measure may be particularly severe when circumstances affecting Indigenous offenders are considered (para. 94). This Court has identified, for instance, that Indigenous offenders may be more adversely affected by incarceration than non-Indigenous offenders (Gladue, at para. 68). Courts may identify these concerns as grounds that support the conclusion that a minimum sentence is grossly disproportionate, keeping in mind that a breach of s. 12 remains a high threshold to meet and a punishment is not grossly disproportionate due to the presence or absence of a single sentencing principle.
                        I turn now to Mr. Hilbach’s and Mr. Zwozdesky’s s. 12 challenges.
B.            Application
                        I first address Mr. Hilbach’s appeal, in which he argues that s. 344(1)(a)(i) is grossly disproportionate as it concerns his own actual circumstances. I will then turn to Mr. Zwozdesky, who concedes the proportionality of the mandatory minimum sentence imposed by s. 344(1)(a.1) as it applies to his case, but relies on a set of hypotheticals to challenge the mandatory minimum sentence provision.
(1)          Application to Mr. Hilbach’s Case
                         The Crown submits that the Court of Appeal majority erred in concluding s. 344(1)(a)(i) was grossly disproportionate in Mr. Hilbach’s case, as they overlooked the gravity of Mr. Hilbach’s offence and failed to recognize deterrence and denunciation were valid penal goals as a result. I agree. The mandatory minimum sentence as applied to Mr. Hilbach is a harsh punishment. However, upon consideration of (1) the scope and reach of the offence; (2) the effects of the punishment on the offender; and (3) the penalty, I am not satisfied the mandatory minimum reaches the high threshold of gross disproportionality.
(a)           Three Years’ Imprisonment Is a Fit and Proportionate Sentence for Mr. Hilbach
                        The Court of Appeal majority overturned the sentencing judge’s sentence of two years less a day and instead concluded that a fit sentence for Mr. Hilbach was three years’ imprisonment. Neither party challenges the Court of Appeal’s finding that a three-year sentence is a fit and proportionate sentence for Mr. Hilbach. No reasonable hypothetical was proffered at first instance, and we need not create one here. The s. 12 analysis will proceed based solely on the facts of Mr. Hilbach’s case.
                        By imposing a sentence that was a full year below the starting point for offences of this nature in Alberta, the sentencing judge failed to adequately weigh the gravity of the offence and the significant aggravating factors in this case. As the majority stated (at paras. 11 and 46), three years’ imprisonment was the starting point adopted for an unsophisticated armed robbery of small commercial establishments “with modest or no success” and “in the absence of actual physical harm” recognized in Johnas, at para. 19 (emphasis added). Mr. Hilbach’s offence not only involved a prohibited firearm, but also resulted in physical harm as his accomplice was physically violent with both store clerks in the course of the robbery. Moreover, Mr. Hilbach pointed the rifle at two employees. He was on probation and was subject to a prohibition order at the time of the offence. He also involved a 13-year-old youth in a violent crime. These are aggravating factors that could support a sentence above the starting point in Johnas. While I accept the mitigating factors identified by the sentencing judge, I agree with the Court of Appeal majority that a sentence that is a full year below the starting point in Johnas would be demonstrably unfit.
(b)          The Mandatory Minimum Is Not Grossly Disproportionate in Mr. Hilbach’s Case
                        This Court has repeatedly affirmed that the threshold for establishing a grossly disproportionate sentence under s. 12 is high (Lloyd, at para. 24). The mandatory minimum sentence must be more than merely excessive, unfit or disproportionate. It must be “so excessive as to outrage standards of decency” (Hills, at para. 109, citing Boudreault, at para. 45; Lloyd, at para. 24, citing Morrisey, at para. 26; R. v. Wiles, 2005 SCC 84, 3 S.C.R. 895, at para. 4, citing Smith, at p. 1072). It is only on “rare and unique occasions” that a sentence will infringe s. 12, as the test is “very properly stringent and demanding” (Steele v. Mountain Institution, 1990 CanLII 50 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 1385, at p. 1417). As I explain below, a mandatory minimum of five years, while harsh and close to the line, is not grossly disproportionate in Mr. Hilbach’s case. The minimum sentence at issue is not so wide that it encompasses conduct that poses relatively little risk of harm. Though Mr. Hilbach’s personal circumstances attenuate his culpability somewhat, his actions constitute a grave offence with high moral blameworthiness. While the effects of imprisonment on Mr. Hilbach, an Indigenous offender, will be severe, five years’ imprisonment in his case is not totally out of sync with sentencing norms. As a result, proportionality and parity are not compromised to the extent seen in Nur, Lloyd and Hills. Parliament’s sentencing objectives and decision to prioritize denunciation and deterrence is justified for this offence. Greater deference to Parliament’s choice to enact a minimum sentence is therefore warranted.
(i)            The Scope and Reach of the Offence
                        As this Court has repeatedly affirmed, mandatory minimum sentences are more vulnerable constitutionally where they apply to a wide range of circumstances (Nur, at paras. 81-82; Lloyd, at paras. 3, 24, 27 and 35-36). The wider the scope of the offence subject to the minimum sentence, the more likely there is a circumstance where the minimum will impose a lengthy term of imprisonment on conduct that involves little risk to the public and little moral fault (Hills, at para. 125; Nur, at para. 83). Thus, a court should consider the variation in the offence’s gravity and the culpability involved and consider whether the sentence captures conduct that does not merit the mandatory minimum.
                        Here, the robbery offence does not cast too broad of a net as to capture conduct that carries low moral fault or little risk to public safety. The gravity of the offence and the culpability of offenders convicted of it is relatively high. To start, even when committed without a firearm, robbery is a serious offence based on the requisite actus reus of the use or threat of violence or force in stealing or attempting to steal property. Adding a firearm to the equation simply increases the gravity of the offence. Further, mere possession of the firearm is not sufficient for conviction. The offender must use the firearm in the commission of the offence. As this Court wrote in R. v. Felawka, 1993 CanLII 36 (SCC), 4 S.C.R. 199, when a firearm is used to threaten or intimidate, it “presents the ultimate threat of death to those in its presence” (p. 211). Prohibited firearms are among the most potent tools in the commission of crime. For example, sawed-off rifles are capable of deadly force, while being easier to conceal, transport, and maneuver in close quarters, like convenience stores.
                        The harmful consequences of using a restricted or prohibited firearm in a robbery are readily identified. There is the risk of death or life-altering physical injury for victims and bystanders if the weapon is discharged. Even if the weapon is not fired, exposure to this threat carries the risk of profound psychological harm. It can be expected that store clerks who are victims of offences like the one perpetrated by Mr. Hilbach will suffer psychological harm. In R. v. Al-Isawi, 2017 BCCA 163, 348 C.C.C. (3d) 524, the accused used an imitation firearm to rob 10 small pharmacies and was convicted of 10 counts of robbery pursuant to s. 85(2) of the Criminal Code. Five of the victims reported feelings of hypervigilance, trauma and fear for their personal safety (para. 29). Beyond the immediate threats to victims, there are wider risks to the community. Wielding a firearm in a store can reasonably provoke force in response, either by police responding to the robbery in progress or bystanders who attempt to intervene. The risk of escalating violence is, as a result, acute.
                        The use of an unloaded prohibited firearm does not substantially reduce the offence’s gravity. The presence of a firearm, even an unloaded one, “in and of itself creates a highly volatile and dangerous situation” (Al-Isawi, at para. 57 (emphasis in original)). A loaded firearm can easily be mistaken for an unloaded firearm, not least by the offenders themselves. A sentencing discount for wielding unloaded firearms also overlooks the very real risk of an offender accidentally discharging a firearm the offender believed was unloaded. It also, for practical reasons, overlooks the difficulty of proving whether or not a firearm was loaded, even if the firearm in use was recovered. Moreover, an unloaded firearm is used for the same reason as a loaded firearm: to instill “the ultimate threat of death to those in its presence” (Felawka, at p. 211). Victims of robbery offences do not know whether the firearm is loaded or unloaded. The same is true for bystanders or police responding to robberies (R. v. Stewart, 2010 BCCA 153, 253 C.C.C. (3d) 301, at para. 37; R. v. Uniat, 2015 ONCA 197, at para. 5 (CanLII)). Regardless of whether the firearm is capable of deadly force at the time of the offence, “[t]he use of a firearm in the commission of a crime exacerbates its terrorizing effects, whether the firearm is real or a mere imitation. Indeed, they share that very purpose” (Steele, at para. 23). The psychological trauma involved in a robbery with an unloaded firearm is therefore comparable to a robbery with a loaded one (R. v. Breese, 2021 ONSC 1611, at para. 34 (CanLII); R. v. John, 2016 ONSC 396, at para. 27 (CanLII); R. v. Stoddart, O.J. No. 6076 (QL), 2005 CarswellOnt 6523 (WL) (S.C.J.), at para. 6, aff’d 2007 ONCA 139, 221 O.A.C. 108; R. v. Asif, 2020 ONSC 1403, at para. 40 (CanLII); R. v. Charley, 2019 ONSC 6490, at para. 45 (CanLII)). So too is the risk of escalating violence.
                        The mental elements required for the minimum to apply suggest a relatively high degree of culpability. An offender who commits robbery with a restricted or prohibited firearm must intend to steal and intend to “use” violence or force (or the threat thereof). A conscious choice must be made to employ violence or force. For the mandatory minimum sentence to apply, that choice extends to the decision to use a particular firearm to commit the offence — the offender must intend to employ the weapon. The offence does not involve an inadvertent decision to put public safety at risk but a conscious choice to put another person’s safety at great risk.
                        There is some breadth to the offence. At the high end of the spectrum, s. 344(1)(a) captures, for example, offenders who organize elaborate, coordinated robberies on large institutions using automatic weaponry and cause serious injuries or death. On the low end of the spectrum, the section captures individuals like Mr. Hilbach, conducting unsophisticated hits on gas stations using unloaded prohibited firearms. This range in gravity and levels of culpability are appropriately reflected in differing sentencing outcomes above the minimum. However, the thread that connects each case is the intent to both steal and to benefit from the deep terror that comes with the threat of a firearm at a proximate range. In each case, the offender uses a firearm to induce fear for their victim in service of their own benefit. While the individual circumstances of the accused and the motivations for their conduct vary, these two elements remain constant. It is this specificity of conduct that Justice Proulx referred to in Lapierre, which aggravates the offence and subjects offenders to this minimum (p. 344).
                        Unlike the hypotheticals considered in Nur, individuals who offend s. 344(1)(a) commit “true crime[s]” (R. v. Nur, 2013 ONCA 677, 117 O.R. (3d) 401, at paras. 205-6, aff’d 2015 SCC 15, 1 S.C.R. 773). It is not the case that the offence involves little or no moral fault and little or no danger to the public (Nur, at paras. 82-83). Individuals found guilty under this section are not akin to the hypothetical proffered in Smith, of a young person caught with their first “joint of grass” on their way home to Canada (p. 1053). Unlike the hypothetical scenario relied upon to invalidate the provision at issue in Hills — namely, a situation involving a young person using a paintball gun that could not perforate the wall of a typical residence — there is no removing the immediacy of personal threat that is inherent to the offence. The nature and scope of the offence requires the presence of victims. Indeed, there are two real victims of Mr. Hilbach’s offence. For this reason, it has not been demonstrated that this mandatory minimum is so wide that it extends to circumstances that pose relatively little risk of harm (as in Smith, Nur, Lloyd or Hills).
(ii)          The Effects of the Penalty on the Offender
                        The second component requires courts to consider the effects of the mandatory penalty on the particular offender. If it inflicts mental pain and suffering on an offender through degrading and dehumanizing treatment or punishment, the punishment is constitutionally vulnerable to the extent that the offender’s dignity is undermined (Hills, at para. 133; Quebec (Attorney General) v. 9147-0732 Québec inc., 2020 SCC 32, at para. 51).
                        In assessing the effects — and therefore the impact — that flow from the prescribed sentence on the actual or hypothetical offender, a court should consider the additional years of imprisonment imposed by the mandatory minimum sentence. Section 12, however, involves a contextual analysis and there is no hard number above or below which a sentence becomes grossly disproportionate. A court may consider the conditions experienced by the offender in serving the mandatory sentence, including whether the mandatory minimum sentence substitutes imprisonment for a probationary sentence, as well as any characteristics or circumstances that enhance the severity of the punishment in the offender’s case (Hills, at para. 133). It bears repeating that the focus is on the sentence, not the possible availability of parole into the assessment of a minimum’s effects (Hills, at para. 104, citing Bissonnette, at paras. 37 and 41, and Nur, at para. 98).
                        The sentencing judge identified two significant effects. At five years, the mandatory minimum sentence was more than double a fit and proportionate sentence. The sentence was also qualitatively worse, given it was to be served in a penitentiary.
                        I accept the sentencing judge’s conclusion that the effects of the five-year mandatory minimum sentence are “severe” in Mr. Hilbach’s case. A five-year term of imprisonment would have detrimental implications for Mr. Hilbach’s rehabilitation, given the sentencing judge’s finding that a penitentiary term increased the likelihood that Mr. Hilbach would re-entrench in gang involvement. It is reasonable in this case to conclude that a five-year mandatory minimum sentence is relatively more severe and, like many Indigenous offenders, Mr. Hilbach would serve harder time as a result (Gladue, at para. 68). Indigenous offenders are more severely affected by incarceration and are often treated in discriminatory ways in custodial environments. Indigenous people are more likely to experience use-of-force incidents in federal penitentiaries and are provided limited access to culturally appropriate programming (Office of the Correctional Investigator, Annual Report 2021-2022 (2022)). Further, incarceration itself is often a culturally inappropriate consequence for wrongdoing for Indigenous offenders (Gladue, at para. 68).
                        These considerations ultimately support the conclusion that a fit and proportionate sentence would fall below the mandatory minimum sentence, notwithstanding the serious violence involved in his offence. Assessed from a purely quantitative standpoint, additional imprisonment beyond a fit and proportionate sentence is not negligible. Indeed, this Court in Lloyd struck down a mandatory minimum sentence of one year’s imprisonment (para. 6). No one would reasonably volunteer for an extra year or two years in jail beyond what a judge considers just as such additional periods of incarceration will result in significant hardship for an offender and their loved ones. These effects must therefore carry significant weight.
(iii)        The Penalty and Its Objectives
                        In this component, courts must first consider which sentencing objectives Parliament prioritized in enacting the mandatory minimum penalty and, second, assess whether the minimum sentence goes beyond what is necessary for Parliament to achieve its objectives (Hills, at para. 138). Denunciation and deterrence are established sentencing principles that Parliament may use to demonstrate the state’s disapproval of serious offences (Hills, at para. 139). While forms of punishment that completely disregard rehabilitation are incompatible with human dignity and violate s. 12 (Bissonnette, at para. 85), no single sentencing objective can be applied to the exclusion of all others (Nasogaluak, at para. 43).
                        So long as Parliament does not completely exclude rehabilitation from its calculus, the legislature may justifiably prioritize some objectives, like denunciation and deterrence, over others in enacting a minimum sentence. Denunciatory sentences express a “collective statement that the offender’s conduct should be punished for encroaching on our society’s basic code of values” (R. v. M. (C.A.), 1996 CanLII 230 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 500, at para. 81). Where the consequences of the offences clearly offend Canadians’ “basic code of values” and call for strong condemnation, this Court has afforded Parliament greater deference in enacting a mandatory minimum sentence that prioritizes denunciation (Hills, at para. 139, citing Morrisey, at para. 47). The need for denunciation is closely tied to the gravity of the offence (Hills, at para. 139, citing Ipeelee, at para. 37). Likewise, while deterrence cannot prevent a mandatory minimum sentence from being cruel and unusual on its own, it can “support a sentence which is more severe while still within the range of punishments that are not cruel and unusual” (Morrisey, at para. 45).
                        That said, deterrence and denunciation cannot be prioritized at all costs. Such an approach would justify sentences of unlimited length (Hills, at para. 140). Consequently, in assessing the mandatory minimum sentence’s valid penal purpose and its respect for sentencing objectives, a court should consider the extent to which the impugned sentence adheres to principles of proportionality and parity (Hills, at para. 145).
                        Parity requires that a sentence “be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences committed in similar circumstances” (s. 718.2(b)). Sentencing ranges and starting points are useful tools in assessing proportionality and parity as they reflect judicial consensus on an offence’s gravity and help reduce substantial disparities in sentencing (R. v. Parranto, 2021 SCC 46, at para. 20, citing R. v. Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64, 3 S.C.R. 1089, at para. 2). Mandatory minimum sentences, as well as the range of sentences set out by Parliament, for similar offences may also assist in this inquiry.
                        In this case, the sentencing judge recognized that while deterrence and denunciation were important considerations, the mandatory minimum sentence put far too great an emphasis on these goals over rehabilitation and Gladue considerations. The Court of Appeal majority agreed, drawing an analogy to mandatory victim surcharges in Boudreault.
                        Both the sentencing judge and the Court of Appeal majority erred in concluding there was no valid penal purpose in this case. Mandatory minimum sentences, by their nature, emphasize deterrence, denunciation, and retribution over rehabilitation and other sentencing purposes (Nur, at para. 44). The question, therefore, is not simply whether the minimum sentence prioritizes these purposes. Instead, a court should consider whether the extent to which Parliament chose to prioritize denunciation and deterrence in setting the penalty is justified. In Mr. Hilbach’s case, Parliament’s decision to prioritize denunciation and deterrence is justifiable.
                        As noted, the need for denunciation is closely tied to the gravity of the offence and the need to communicate our society’s condemnation of acts that infringe our basic moral values (M. (C.A.), at para. 81; Ipeelee, at para. 37). Parliament is afforded deference in enacting denunciatory mandatory minimums where conduct, like robbing an individual at gunpoint, clearly offends our most basic values.
                        In this case, the mandatory minimum sentence captures conduct that clearly warrants deterrence and the strong denunciation that a substantial prison sentence signals. As the sentencing judge acknowledged, denunciation and deterrence were “important” considerations in Mr. Hilbach’s case, given the gravity of the offence (para. 20). The use of a restricted or prohibited firearm in a robbery poses grave risk to public safety. As this Court wrote in Morrisey, Parliament is entitled to enact mandatory minimum sentences that signal that a disregard for the life and safety of others in handling firearms is “simply not acceptable” (para. 47 (emphasis in original)). The mandatory minimum sentence therefore applies to a category of conduct that calls for strong condemnation.
                        General deterrence also has a role here. As this Court recognized in Morrisey, “[i]t cannot be disputed that there is a need for general deterrence” when a person endangers the safety of others in wielding a firearm (para. 46). Like the mandatory minimum sentence in that case, this minimum sentence “dictates that those who pick up a gun must exercise care when handling it” (Morrisey, at para. 46). While Smith notes there may be little need to punish the “small” offender in order to deter the serious offender (at p. 1080), there are no “small” offenders in the way this Court conceived in Nur, Smith, and Lloyd. Mr. Hilbach’s actions, for example, are precisely the conduct that Parliament sought to deter. Consequently, short of cruel and unusual punishment, general deterrence can support a sentence which is more severe while still within the range of punishments that are not cruel and unusual (Morrisey, at para. 45; Nur, at para. 45).
                        My conclusion that Parliament was entitled to prioritize deterrence and denunciation here is consistent with the sentencing jurisprudence on robbery, which bears out the importance of these purposes in sentencing for this offence (C. C. Ruby, Sentencing (10th ed. 2020), at §23.494). It is also compatible with the greater emphasis on these purposes by courts in sentencing where a firearm is used to commit acts of interpersonal violence (see, e.g., R. v. Jones, 2012 ONCA 609, at para. 12 (CanLII); R. v. Maytwayashing, 2018 MBCA 36, at para. 40 (CanLII); R. v. Agin, 2018 BCCA 133, 361 C.C.C. (3d) 258, at para. 67; R. v. D. (Q.) (2005), 2005 CanLII 30044 (ON CA), 199 C.C.C. (3d) 490 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 78; R. v. Marshall, 2015 ONCA 692, 340 O.A.C. 201, at para. 49; R. v. Bellissimo, 2009 ONCA 49, at para. 5 (CanLII); R. v. Brown, 2010 ONCA 745, 277 O.A.C. 233, at paras. 13-14). In this context, courts have emphasized the need for denunciation and deterrence both to convey our society’s abhorrence of gun violence and to communicate to potential offenders that a significant sentence accompanies the use of a gun to commit violence (D. (Q.), at paras. 77-78; Jones, at para. 12; R. v. Mark, 2018 ONSC 447, at para. 24 (CanLII); R. v. Thavakularatnam, 2018 ONSC 2380, at para. 21 (CanLII)).
                        In the case of offenders like Mr. Hilbach, with reduced moral culpability due to, for example, developmental delays or a substance use disorder, the five-year mandatory minimum may exceed what is necessary to achieve Parliament’s sentencing objectives (Hills, at para. 138). In Mr. Hilbach’s case, a five-year minimum term in custody is a harsh punishment considering his personal circumstances.
                        Nevertheless, the sentencing judge overlooked that this case is distinguishable from Nur, Smith and Lloyd insofar as a substantial carceral sentence is a proportionate sentence in Mr. Hilbach’s case. Indeed, as noted, the defence does not challenge that three years’ imprisonment is a fit sentence. Thus, unlike Nur, Smith and Lloyd, the mandatory minimum sentence here does not impose a lengthy term of imprisonment, the punishment of “last resort”, when such a sentence would not otherwise be possible, or even common. Mandatory minimum sentences are necessarily more vulnerable when they replace a probationary sentence with lengthy prison terms. While it nevertheless remains important to compare two sentences involving long terms of imprisonment, it can be more difficult to establish gross disproportionality in this scenario than those at issue in Nur and Lloyd.
                        The mandatory minimum sentence for robbery with a restricted or prohibited firearm in Mr. Hilbach’s case is not totally out of sync with sentencing norms for an offence of this nature. To begin, sentences below two years’ imprisonment are relatively rare for robbery, which has no mandatory minimum sentence where it is committed with no weapon or a weapon other than a gun (Ruby, at §23.498). Where a weapon (other than a gun) is used in robberies of commercial establishments, as is the case here, the low end falls in the one-to-two-year range, with a mid-range between three and five years, and a high end of around eight years (Ruby, at §§23.521, 23.528 and 23.532). Even without a mandatory minimum sentence, the sentencing range for robbery with a restricted or prohibited firearm would skew higher, since the use of such a dangerous weapon is an aggravating factor. Thus, while a five-year mandatory minimum arguably sits above what Mr. Hilbach would receive and the low end that would likely otherwise develop, the minimum does not far exceed what is necessary for Parliament to achieve its sentencing objectives.
                        Thus, Mr. Hilbach’s case does not show the mandatory minimum sentence departs from the principle of parity to the same extent as the minimums in Smith, Nur, Lloyd and Hills. As noted, substantial, multi-year carceral sentences are the norm for this offence. This distinguishes this case from Nur, where the mandatory minimum sentence at issue imposed three-year prison terms for what were essentially licensing infractions, a result that was “totally out of sync” with sentencing practices for licensing offences (para. 83). It cannot be said that, as in Nur, there is a “cavernous disconnect” between the mandatory minimum and Mr. Hilbach’s conduct (para. 83). Given the relationship between parity and proportionality, this supports a finding that the minimum sentence in this case is not grossly disproportionate.
                        Moreover, the mandatory minimum sentence here is not wholly analogous to the mandatory victim surcharges considered in Boudreault. In that case, the penal purpose of mandatory victim surcharges was to raise funds for victim services and increase the accountability of offenders to individual victims and the community generally (para. 62). Neither penal purpose was likely to be realized for impecunious or impoverished offenders, who had no funds to spare (para. 63). Here, the penal purposes associated with the mandatory minimum are not unlikely to be realized, given Mr. Hilbach’s conduct is precisely what Parliament intended to denounce and deter. Moreover, proportionality and parity were compromised to a greater extent in Boudreault, since the surcharges effectively imposed indeterminate sentences on impecunious offenders, although such punishment is reserved only for Canada’s worst offenders (para. 79). The minimum here is more in line with sentencing norms for an offence of this nature.
                        That said, as in Boudreault, the minimum does not advance Parliament’s intention to ameliorate the serious problem of overrepresentation of Indigenous peoples in prison, embodied in s. 718.2(e). Nor does it promote the objective of rehabilitation. A sentence that undermines Mr. Hilbach’s ability to avoid gang life, and increases the likelihood of his recidivism as a result, does not foster rehabilitation. Though the minimum sentence may not aid Mr. Hilbach’s rehabilitation, I do not find that the minimum completely disregards rehabilitation as a sentencing principle (Hills, at para. 34). Parliament has not selected a minimum punishment that prioritizes denunciation and deterrence to the exclusion of rehabilitation in Mr. Hilbach’s case.
                        Despite its effect viewed through the lens of s. 718.2(e), I am unable to conclude that the minimum sentence goes beyond what is necessary to achieve Parliament’s purpose such that it fails to reflect rehabilitation entirely and undermines human dignity. As noted, Parliament was justified in prioritizing denunciation and deterrence over rehabilitation, given the nature of this offence. And while the minimum sentence departs from principles of parity and proportionality in Mr. Hilbach’s case, it does not result in a sentence that is grossly disproportionate to the sentencing norms for this offence.
                        I reiterate that gross disproportionality is measured at a high threshold: the sentence must be “so excessive as to outrage standards of decency” (Hills, at para. 109, citing Boudreault, at para. 45; Lloyd, at para. 24, citing Morrisey, at para. 26; Wiles, at para. 4, citing Smith, at p. 1072). Only on “rare and unique occasions” does such a label attach to a sentence as the standard is “very properly stringent and demanding” and intended to reflect a measure of deference to Parliament in crafting sentencing provisions (Hills, at para. 115, citing Steele v. Mountain Institution, at p. 1417). The standard of gross disproportionality under s. 12 does not require the punishment to be “perfectly suited to accommodate the moral nuances of every crime and every offender” (R. v. Lyons, 1987 CanLII 25 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 309, at pp. 344-45). The difference between the mandatory minimum sentence and Mr. Hilbach’s individual circumstances does not “outrage standards of decency”. Concluding that the five-year mandatory minimum sentence is grossly disproportionate in the circumstances of Mr. Hilbach would erode away the high standard at the core of this Court’s s. 12 jurisprudence.
                        For these reasons, the five-year mandatory minimum sentence prescribed by s. 344(1)(a)(i) does not infringe s. 12 of the Charter. Since Mr. Hilbach does not propose any reasonably foreseeable hypothetical scenarios where s. 344(1)(a)(i) is allegedly grossly disproportionate, I turn next to Mr. Zwozdesky’s challenge to s. 344(1)(a.1).
(2)          Application in Mr. Zwozdesky’s Case
                        The amici curiae for Mr. Zwozdesky concede that the impugned mandatory minimum sentence was not grossly disproportionate in his case. Instead, they advance five scenarios where they maintain the mandatory minimum sentence in s. 344(1)(a.1) is grossly disproportionate. The Crown maintains that several of these scenarios are not reasonably foreseeable and, in any event, they do not illustrate the minimum is grossly disproportionate. In support of its claims, the Crown relies on the same concerns it raises in Mr. Hilbach’s case, pointing out the gravity of the offence and the related need for denunciation and deterrence.
                        The scenarios advanced by the amici raise circumstances not addressed in Mr. Hilbach’s case, including party liability, unplanned or impulsive robberies, and the use of air-powered firearms. While these circumstances introduce a degree of reduced gravity and culpability compared to Mr. Hilbach’s case, they are insufficient to establish that s. 344(1)(a.1) is grossly disproportionate. Parliament could justifiably prioritize deterrence and denunciation in these circumstances as well and, as in Mr. Hilbach’s case, they do not show four years’ imprisonment for robbery with a firearm is totally out of sync with sentencing norms. I begin with the scenarios advanced by Mr. Zwozdesky’s amici.
(a)           What Reasonably Foreseeable Scenarios Involve the Impugned Mandatory Minimum Sentence Provision?
                        The amici raise five detailed scenarios where the mandatory minimum is allegedly grossly disproportionate. In each scenario, the offender pleaded guilty to robbery with a firearm. The scenarios are as follows:
(1)                  Eric, a “knuckleheaded” 18-year-old hunter, confronts two other hunters skinning a deer on his land, whom he suspects of poaching based on “town gossip” about one of the hunters. The trespassers have tags for the deer. Eric raises his rifle at the hunters but does not directly point it at the two. The two hunters opt to leave the deer, and Eric finishes skinning the deer and takes it home.
(2)                  Danielle, a 19-year-old street youth with a drug addiction, is trafficked in sex work by her boyfriend. Her boyfriend carries a gun, which she knows as he has recently used it to threaten her. They decide to shoplift cheese and razors from a grocery store. When stopped by a security guard, Danielle shouts, “Out of our way — he’s got a gun!” The gun is not produced, but police find the weapon in her boyfriend’s waistband when the pair are later arrested.
(3)                  Chahid, a 19-year-old youth and refugee from a war-torn country, has learning difficulties and post-traumatic stress disorder. On a walk, his friend approaches two people at a bus stop, flashes a handgun in his waistband and demands their cellphone, which they turn over. Chahid was unaware his friend had a gun before this moment and unaware that his friend planned a robbery. Nevertheless, he keeps a “nervous lookout”. As it happens, the police are nearby and move to intercede. Chahid tells his friend to run, but the two are arrested. At sentencing, Chahid has completed high school, entered a post-secondary trade program, and supports himself with manual labour. A sentence above six months would place him at risk of deportation. He pleads guilty as a party to the offence.
(4)                  Brian, a 21-year-old Indigenous man, suffers from alcoholism and fetal alcohol spectrum disorder, is extremely intoxicated and face down in a snowbank when a good Samaritan stops to help him. He grabs the woman, reaches into his waistband, flashes a BB gun, and snatches her purse. The BB gun is operable and capable of taking an eyeball out, but it is unloaded.
(5)                  Adam, a 26-year-old Indigenous man, suffers from a drug addiction and schizophrenia, and had a short criminal record. When meeting his drug dealer in a parking lot, he produces an airsoft pistol, points it at his dealer, and takes some methamphetamines. Before sentencing, he receives treatment for schizophrenia and his drug addiction.
                        Of the five, the Court of Appeal majority concluded that Adam and Brian were reasonably foreseeable hypothetical scenarios for the purposes of a s. 12 analysis and the others were not. I agree. Brian is based on a “real” offender, the facts of which are reported in R. v. Smart, 2014 ABPC 175, 595 A.R. 266. As for Adam, the robbery of a drug dealer is a reasonably foreseeable scenario. That this offence would be committed by someone suffering mental health and addiction challenges is clearly foreseeable. While an air-powered pistol may be a relatively uncommon firearm to use for this offence, they are undoubtedly used in robberies (see, for instance, R. v. Lodoen, heard together with the appeal in Johnas).
                         The scenarios involving Eric, Danielle and Chahid do not qualify as reasonable hypotheticals. As their name suggests, reasonably foreseeable scenarios are situations that may reasonably be expected to arise as a matter of common sense and judicial experience (Nur, at para. 74). The following are characteristics of a reasonable hypothetical as outlined in Hills, at para. 77:
(i)                    The hypothetical must be reasonably foreseeable;
 
(ii)                 Reported cases may be considered in the analysis;
 
(iii)               The hypothetical must be reasonable in view of the range of conduct in the offence in question;
 
(iv)                Personal characteristics may be considered as long as they are not tailored to create remote or far-fetched examples; and
 
(v)                  Reasonable hypotheticals are best tested through the adversarial process.
                        As this Court reiterated in Hills, reasonable hypothetical scenarios ought not to be “far-fetched or marginally imaginable cases”, nor should they be “remote or extreme examples” (Hills, at para. 78, citing Morrisey, at para. 30, citing Goltz, at pp. 506 and 515). Personal characteristics such as age, Indigeneity, mental health issues, and addiction are potentially relevant as they are common to offenders in Canadian courtrooms. However, such characteristics ought not be used to construct the most sympathetic offender imaginable (Hills, at para. 91; Nur, at para. 75). Common sense and judicial experience counsels that offenders with only mitigating personal characteristics are rare, and it is even more improbable to see such offenders in the most unlikely scenarios falling within the scope of an offence. Stacking mitigating factors and stretching every constituent element of an offence produces a hypothetical scenario that is fanciful and not reasonably foreseeable (Hills, at para. 91). A court is not obliged to address every hypothetical presented by counsel if it finds that some do not qualify as “reasonably foreseeable” scenarios.
                        While technically within the scope of s. 344(1)(a.1), Eric’s scenario is far‑fetched and marginal. Chahid barely satisfies the criteria of an aider or abettor under s. 21(1) of the Criminal Code and stretches the constituent elements of the offence (R. v. Briscoe, 2010 SCC 13, 1 S.C.R. 411, at para. 18). The scenario involves conduct that would likely fall outside the ambit of the provision. This Court in Hills found that while the scope of the offence may be tested to explore the breadth of the offence, straining every constituent element of the offence is not helpful (para. 83). The scenarios involving Danielle and Chahid stack multiple mitigating personal characteristics alongside the most marginal iterations of the offence to construct the “most sympathetic offender” imaginable. These hypotheticals may serve to demonstrate “more about the imagination of counsel” than the true scope of the provision (Hills, at para. 83). There is little use in evaluating the impugned provision based on outlandish scenarios on the theory that the imagined scenarios may happen one day. Therefore, the scenarios involving Eric, Danielle and Chahid are not reasonably foreseeable.
                        The majority also concluded two hypotheticals drawn from reported decisions, R. v. Link, 2012 MBPC 25, 276 Man. R. (2d) 157, and Lodoen, were reasonably foreseeable. Both cases dealt with youthful offenders involved in convenience store robberies. Link concerned an 18-year-old Indigenous woman, who pled guilty as a party to a convenience store robbery where the principal used an imitation firearm (paras. 1 and 7-22). The offender in Lodoen was an 18-year-old youthful offender who used a BB gun in the commission of a robbery and pled guilty (Johnas, at para. 68). Neither Link nor Lodoen involved the minimum sentence at issue here. I accept they are foreseeable, provided they are modified to fit within the scope of the minimum sentences.
(b)          Two Years’ to Two and a Half Years’ Imprisonment Is a Fit and Proportionate Sentence in Reasonably Foreseeable Scenarios
                        This leads me to the fit and proportionate sentences for Adam, Brian and the offenders in the scenarios based on Link and Lodoen. The Court of Appeal majority concluded that a fit and proportionate sentence for the reasonably foreseeable scenarios identified above would be around two years’ imprisonment (para. 70). Neither the Crown nor the defence challenge the majority’s conclusion on this point. I, too, see no basis to interfere.
                        Adam’s and Brian’s offences involved street muggings, an offence with a sentencing range around 12 to 18 months. Evidently, the use of a weapon and, in particular, a firearm is an aggravating factor in each case. Brian’s offence also involved the application of force to the victim, while Adam’s involved a greater degree of planning and a prior criminal record. In Adam’s case, as well, there is the serious public safety risk involved in using a firearm to settle a drug dispute, a consideration that supports a significant sentence (R. v. Delchev, 2014 ONCA 448, 323 O.A.C. 19, at para. 20). This could support sentences significantly above this range. Nevertheless, the moral blameworthiness of both offenders is attenuated given the mental health and addiction issues that underlay their actions, as well as any applicable Gladue considerations. I therefore agree a sentence around two years would be fit and proportionate in these cases.
                        Scenarios based on Link and Lodoen would similarly support sentences around 18 months’ to 2 years’ imprisonment. They are each convenience store robberies involving young, first-time offenders, so the three-year starting point from Johnas applies. While the offender in Link received a conditional sentence of 18 months, the offence involved an imitation firearm (para. 120). Further, the sentencing judge concluded she had no fault in using the firearm, as she was “shocked and surprised when a gun was produced” (para. 117). A carceral sentence would therefore be warranted had Ms. Link gone into the robbery knowing a real firearm would be used. Lodoen resulted in a sentence of 18 months (para. 70). Assuming the gun meets the definition of a firearm, a sentence above 18 months may be warranted, given it is an aggravating factor. Thus, a sentence in around 18 months to 2 years would be appropriate.
(c)           The Mandatory Minimum Is Not Grossly Disproportionate in Reasonably Foreseeable Scenarios
                        The Court of Appeal majority concluded s. 344(1)(a.1) was grossly disproportionate in Adam’s and Brian’s cases, as well as in scenarios similar to Link and Lodoen, noting the minimum sentence resulted in roughly more than double a fit and proportionate sentence. In my view, the majority is in error. As with s. 344(1)(a)(i), having regard to (1) the scope and reach of the offence, (2) the effects of the penalty on the offender and (3) the penalty and its objectives, the four-year mandatory minimum for robbery does not “outrage standards of decency”.
                        Regarding the scope and reach of the offence, as in Mr. Hilbach’s case, the scenarios raised here do not demonstrate the mandatory minimum sentence casts too broad of a net and captures offenders with low culpability. Mr. Zwozdesky advances three main factors that render these scenarios relatively less severe compared to Mr. Hilbach’s case: they involve air-powered pistols, they are unplanned (as in Brian’s case), and they involve a party to the offence (as in Ms. Link’s case). None of these considerations, in my opinion, establishes the minimum is so wide it applies in circumstances involving little fault and little danger.
                        Provincial appellate courts have repeatedly upheld the constitutionality of the mandatory minimum sentences for robbery, even in the face of sympathetic accused, because the offence’s mens rea and actus reus apply to a relatively narrow set of violent behaviours, and conviction requires a deliberate and specific act with a defined harm (Hills, at para. 131; R. v. McIntyre, 2019 ONCA 161, 429 C.R.R. (2d) 346; McIvor; Lapierre; R. v. Wust (1998), 1998 CanLII 5492 (BC CA), 125 C.C.C. (3d) 43 (B.C.C.A.); McDonald; R. v. Bernarde, 2018 NWTCA 7). Further, in McDonald, Justice Rosenberg found a four-year sentence would likely be a manifestly unfit sentence for the accused on an appellate review standard. However, the sentence did not reach the high threshold of being grossly disproportionate as it was open to Parliament to legislate harsh punishments for firearm offences. Considering the objective gravity of the offence, Justice Rosenberg found a four-year prison sentence did not shock the conscience or outrage standards of decency (pp. 666 and 669).
                        Robbery constitutes a grave offence even when committed without a weapon, given the offence involves the use or threat of violence in stealing property. Moreover, each of the scenarios involves the use of a firearm. As discussed above, “firearm” in this context encompasses ordinary hunting rifles and shotguns subject to the Firearms Act’s licensing regime to barrelled devices that can be purchased without a licence, such as air-powered weapons like BB guns and airsoft pistols. Nevertheless, to qualify as a firearm, at bottom, these devices must be capable of inflicting serious bodily injury, such as rupturing a person’s eye. As I noted in Mr. Hilbach’s case, the use of a firearm “presents the ultimate threat of death to those in its presence” (Felawka, at p. 211). That is equally true where an ordinary firearm is used, such as a hunting rifle and shotgun. While an air-powered rifle may be incapable of inflicting a fatal injury, an offender who uses such a device to intimidate exploits the fear that conventional firearms provoke and, at the very least, threatens to inflict life-altering injury. I am not satisfied that since the minimum sentence applies where an offender merely uses a firearm, as opposed to a restricted or prohibited one, there is little risk to public safety. 
                        It is important to consider the offence from the standpoint of the victims in the scenarios raised by Mr. Zwozdesky. Here, there is always a person placed at serious risk of injury, regardless of whether a conventional or air-powered firearm is used. For victims, there remains the risk of life-altering physical injury when air-powered firearms are used in the course of a robbery, a risk that is not present with imitation firearms. Further, the risk of psychological trauma arising from the use of an air‑powered rifle remains similar to that of a conventional firearm. As the British Columbia Court of Appeal found in Al-Isawi, “whether an offender uses a real or imitation firearm does not impact the harm to the victim who would not know the difference” (para. 39). I am not persuaded that victims of a robbery, like the ones in Adam’s and Brian’s cases, will ordinarily have the presence of mind to distinguish between an air-powered rifle and a conventional one, any more than they can differentiate between a loaded or unloaded shotgun. There is, as a result, the risk of escalating violence, as such an apparent deadly threat risks a dangerous response from bystanders and police responding to an incident. From the standpoint of public safety, as a result, there is not a dramatic difference between robbing a person with a conventional firearm and an air-powered firearm.
                        The ever-present threat to victims and public safety distinguishes this offence from the one at issue in Hills. An essential element of robbery with or without the use of a firearm is the use of actual violence or the threat of violence to a person in the commission of the offence. There is an immediacy to the threat that distinguishes the offence from the hypothetical scenario raised in Hills. The offender must intend to strike fear in the heart of his victim. The offender chose to use a firearm, knowing that he may gain a material benefit due to the universal fear that firearms invoke for the public. In assessing the gravity of the offence, the threat to victims and the public in these scenarios cannot be downplayed or overlooked.
                    Moreover, the culpability central to this offence does not profoundly differ from that of s. 344(1)(a)(i) and is consistent for all individuals charged under the offence. In order for s. 344(1)(a.1) to apply, an offender must intend to steal and intend to use violence or force (or the threat thereof). The offender must also intend to use the firearm. As a result, a conscious choice must be made to threaten a person’s safety using a firearm. That is true whether or not the offence is perpetrated using a conventional or air-powered firearm. Like Mr. Hilbach’s case, while there are undoubtedly mitigating personal circumstances that reduce an offender’s culpability in Mr. Zwozdesky’s scenarios, there remains an essential degree of fault arising from the choice to threaten the safety of others.
                    Mr. Zwozdesky nevertheless raises the possibility that parties to the offence may have reduced culpability, citing the example of Link. However, I am not persuaded that Link illustrates the notion that parties to the offence have little moral fault relative to principal offenders. The question of whether an offender’s role as an aider or abettor plays a mitigating factor in sentencing is highly contextual (R. v. Overacker, 2005 ABCA 150, 367 A.R. 250, at paras. 23-26; R. v. Hennessey, 2010 ABCA 274, 490 A.R. 35, at para. 47). A sentencing discount purely because a party was an aider or abettor would go against the purpose of the party liability provisions in s. 21, which ensure an “individual will bear the same responsibility for the offence regardless of which particular role he or she played” (R. v. Vu, 2012 SCC 40, 2 S.C.R. 411, at para. 58 (emphasis added), citing R. v. Thatcher, 1987 CanLII 53 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 652, at pp. 689-90). Where there is a disparity between the criminal records of the principal and the aider or abettor, or where there are aggravating circumstances, like assaultive behaviour, that apply to the principal but not the aider or abettor, then the latter offender’s sentence may be lower than that of the principal (McIvor, at para. 29; R. v. Price (2000), 2000 CanLII 5679 (ON CA), 144 C.C.C. (3d) 343 (Ont. C.A.), at paras. 54-56). However, both are jointly responsible for the commission of the index offence. As a matter of principle and policy, finding otherwise would encourage offenders to act as aiders or abettors. Thus, the minimum sentence’s mere application to aiders and abettors fails to establish its constitutional infirmity.
                    For s. 344(1)(a.1) to apply, an aider or abettor under s. 21(1) must have knowledge or its equivalent in relation to the firearm’s use. As noted, s. 344 is modelled on s. 85 of the Criminal Code. Nothing in the wording of s. 344 implies an intention on the part of Parliament to extend its application to offenders whose culpability was less than required for a conviction under s. 85. The “usual rules of complicity” for parties under s. 21 apply to s. 85 (Steele, at para. 33; see also McGuigan, at pp. 307-8). Thus, in a scenario like Link, the aider must intend to assist the principal knowing (or at least wilfully blind) that the principal intended to use the firearm in committing the robbery (Briscoe, at paras. 15-18). That is to say, one must consciously choose to provide assistance to the principal with knowledge or its equivalent that a firearm is used. For this reason, the oblivious offender in Link was not subject to the minimum. When this element is made out, I am not persuaded the offender has little culpability. As a party to the offence, the aider benefits from the threat of violence that emanates from the firearm. It offers each party protection and ensures the cooperation of victims, a result that benefits the aider and abettor as much as the principal.
                    Moreover, without the contribution of each party, the robbery could not be pulled off at all, a result that supports treating principals and aiders alike. As the English Court of Appeal observed,
there is no distinction in a crime of this kind to be drawn [in sentencing] between those who actually use the violence and those who stand outside and though not using violence are ready to drive away, to kidnap, or perform whatever other task may be appropriate. If this Court or a trial judge is dealing with a case of armed robbery of a bank at gunpoint or with iron bars, or of a security van carrying large quantities of notes to a branch of a bank, it does not normally stop to consider whether a particular prisoner actually held up the cashier or held up the guard, had a gun or had an iron bar or was the driver standing outside ready to drive away. All are equally guilty because without each playing his full part the crime could not be perpetrated.
 
(R. v. Church (1985), 7 Cr. App. R. (S.) 370, at p. 372)
                    Mr. Zwozdesky also relies on the possibility of unplanned robberies. In Brian’s case, for instance, the intention to commit the offence was not formed until the good Samaritan attempted to offer assistance. The degree of planning behind an offence can act as an aggravating factor in sentencing. In Brian’s case, however, the lack of planning cannot be equated with a lack of culpability. The scenario involves the intentional use of force, snatching a purse, and threatening violence while brandishing a BB gun, which the offender opted to carry with him in public. What Brian shares with all other offenders charged under this section is that he saw the opportunity to benefit financially from another person’s fear of firearms and capitalized on it. As a result, the essential element of culpability that I noted above equally applies to Brian. This scenario is, again, an instance where an offender chose to threaten the safety of others using a firearm.
                    For these reasons, Mr. Zwozdesky’s scenarios do not establish s. 344(1)(a.1) applies in circumstances involving little or no danger to the public or little or no fault. I am not persuaded the distinctions between the lethality of the firearms involved, or the fact of party liability, establish dramatically different degrees of severity in the context of this offence. At bottom, in all these scenarios, in order to steal, an offender makes a conscious choice to place another person at risk of life-altering injury and significant psychological trauma. Like Mr. Hilbach’s offence, they are “true crime[s]”.
                    The effects of the penalty on the offender are severe. For Indigenous offenders, the effects have the potential to be as severe as the mandatory minimum sentence in Mr. Hilbach’s case. These effects, as in Mr. Hilbach’s case, are significant and can be neither ignored nor minimized. As was noted in Hills, youthful offenders are subject to bullying, are susceptible to gang recruitment and are more vulnerable to segregation placements (para. 165). A term of imprisonment can result in a more severe penalty for an accused with a mental illness than it may for others. Courts have noted that individuals may not have access to appropriate treatment while incarcerated and, for some mentally ill offenders, any period of incarceration may be extremely harmful to their mental state (R. v. Wallace (1973), 1973 CanLII 1434 (ON CA), 11 C.C.C. (2d) 95 (Ont. C.A.), at p. 100; R. v. Folino (2005), 2005 CanLII 40543 (ON CA), 77 O.R. (3d) 641 (C.A.), at paras. 29-32). The individual circumstances of the hypothetical offenders indicate the period of incarceration required under s. 344(1)(a.1) would likely result in severe detrimental effects.
                    An inquiry into the penalty and its objectives reveals the analysis for s. 344(1)(a.1) and s. 344(1)(a)(i) is similar. Parliament chose to impose the strong moral condemnation that a substantial prison sentence signals, which is reasonable given the offenders’ choice to put public safety at risk offends basic moral values. Greater deference to Parliament’s decision to enact the mandatory minimum is therefore warranted. As in Mr. Hilbach’s case, general deterrence has a role, as “[i]t cannot be disputed that there is a need for general deterrence” when a person endangers the safety of others in wielding a firearm (Morrisey, at para. 46). At the same time, it is true that Parliament’s prioritization of general deterrence departs more seriously from sentencing norms in the case of offenders like Adam, who suffer from mental disorders, because these types of offenders are inappropriate mediums by which to discourage others (Ruby, at §5.316; R. v. Dedeckere, 2017 ONCA 799, 15 M.V.R. (7th) 177, at para. 14; R. v. Batisse, 2009 ONCA 114, 93 O.R. (3d) 643, at para. 38). Even so, ultimately the minimum is not “totally out of sync” with sentencing norms for this offence, given the sentencing ranges discussed for robbery above. However, as the dissent noted, the mandatory minimum is effectively double what a fit and proportionate sentence would likely be for the hypothetical offenders had the mandatory penalty not applied.
                    Nevertheless, as with s. 344(1)(a)(i), the disconnect between the mandatory minimum sentence and the individual circumstances of the offenders here does not render the sentence grossly disproportionate. I echo my comments that the gross disproportionality standard is a high bar that applies in rare instances. If the punishment at bar was being evaluated on the appellate standard, I would find the four‑year minimum demonstrably unfit for the reasonable hypotheticals proffered by Mr. Zwozdesky. However, I am not persuaded that the mandatory minimum in this case “shock[s] the conscience” (Lloyd, at para. 33) or is “so excessive as to outrage standards of decency” (Hills, at para. 109, citing Boudreault, at para. 45; Lloyd, at para. 24, citing Morrisey, at para. 26; Wiles, at para. 4, citing Smith, at p. 1072). While the punishment is severe, the high threshold for gross disproportionality is not met here. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the four-year mandatory minimum term of imprisonment does not infringe s. 12 of the Charter.
                    Having concluded neither mandatory minimum infringes s. 12 of the Charter, it is unnecessary to address whether the infringement may be saved under s. 1.
C.            Conclusion
                    The Crown’s appeal is allowed. The mandatory minimum sentences set out in s. 344(1)(a)(i) and the former s. 344(1)(a.1) are constitutional and do not constitute cruel and unusual punishment. The Court of Appeal’s judgments on this ground are set aside. No order is necessary in respect of Mr. Zwozdesky’s sentence, owing to his passing.
                    In respect of Mr. Hilbach’s sentence, I am of the view that it is appropriate in this case to stay the execution of the post-appeal portion of the sentence. This was the approach taken by the Court of Appeal majority. In rare cases where appellate courts have imposed custodial sentences to comply with mandatory provisions of the Criminal Code, including mandatory minimum sentences, they have stayed the execution of the post-appeal portion of the sentence. A stay for a post-appeal sentence may be available where there is extenuating delay in the legal process, particularly at the appellate stage, through no fault of the offender (R. v. Anderson, 2014 SCC 41, 2 S.C.R. 167; R. v. Proulx, 2000 SCC 5, 1 S.C.R. 61; R. v. McMillan, 2016 MBCA 12, 326 Man. R. (2d) 56; R. v. Shi, 2015 ONCA 646). Given over four years have lapsed since Mr. Hilbach was sentenced, I am satisfied this is such a case.
       The following are the reasons delivered by
 
                   Côté J. — 
                    I agree with my colleague Martin J.’s disposition of the Crown’s appeal. However, for the reasons outlined in my dissent in the companion appeal R. v. Hills, 2023 SCC 2, I respectfully disagree with her new three‑part test for gross disproportionality at the second stage of the established framework set out in R. v. Nur, 2015 SCC 15, 1 S.C.R. 773, and recently affirmed in R. v. Bissonnette, 2022 SCC 23, at para. 63.
                    Applying this established legal framework, I agree that the mandatory minimum sentences prescribed by s. 344(1)(a)(i) and the former s. 344(1)(a.1) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C‑46, do not meet the high threshold for cruel and unusual punishment. While they have the potential to be excessive in reasonably foreseeable cases, they are not so excessive as to “outrage standards of decency” (R. v. Smith, 1987 CanLII 64 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 1045, at p. 1072) or “shock the conscience of Canadians” (R. v. Lloyd, 2016 SCC 13, 1 S.C.R. 130, at para. 33). I would allow the appeal.
       The following are the reasons delivered by
 
                   Karakatsanis and Jamal JJ. — 
                     Mandatory minimum sentences reflect Parliament’s determination that a crime is so serious that it must be met with a minimum punishment, regardless of the particular circumstances of the offence or the offender. When in place, there is no judicial discretion to impose a lesser sentence. 
                     Mandatory minimum sentences are, however, subject to scrutiny under s. 12 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, which guarantees everyone “the right not to be subjected to any cruel and unusual treatment or punishment”. They are more constitutionally vulnerable when they apply to an offence that can be committed in various ways, under a broad array of circumstances, and by a wide range of people (R. v. Lloyd, 2016 SCC 13, 1 S.C.R. 130, at para. 3). Such provisions will be unconstitutional where they are, or could be on a reasonably foreseeable basis, grossly disproportionate to what would otherwise be a fit sentence in the circumstances.
                     Between this appeal and its companion case, R. v. Hills, 2023 SCC 2, three mandatory minimum sentences are at issue. We agree with the reasons of our colleague Justice Martin in Hills. Section 244.2(3)(b) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, which imposes a four-year mandatory minimum sentence on anyone convicted of intentionally discharging a firearm into or at a place, contrary to s. 244.2(1)(a), violates s. 12 of the Charter and has not been justified under s. 1.
                     We part company, however, with our colleague’s conclusion on the constitutionality of the provisions at issue in this appeal: s. 344(1)(a)(i) of the Criminal Code, which imposes a five-year mandatory minimum sentence for a first offence of robbery with a restricted or prohibited firearm; and s. 344(1)(a.1) of the Criminal Code, which imposes a four-year mandatory minimum sentence for the offence of robbery with a firearm. We note that Parliament recently repealed s. 344(1)(a.1) (An Act to amend the Criminal Code and the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, S.C. 2022, c. 15). 
                     Armed robbery is a grave offence that typically warrants a penitentiary sentence. But in our view, the mandatory minimum sentences under both provisions cast an unconstitutionally wide net, capturing reasonably foreseeable cases for which the mandatory minimum sentence would be grossly disproportionate. For these cases, the mandatory minimum sentences are “so excessive as to outrage standards of decency” (Lloyd, at paras. 24 and 87, citing Miller v. The Queen, 1976 CanLII 12 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 680, at p. 688, per Laskin C.J.), violating the constitutional guarantee against cruel and unusual punishment under s. 12 of the Charter. They cannot be saved under s. 1, and therefore should be declared of no force and effect.
                     We would, accordingly, dismiss the Crown’s appeal.
I.               Background
A.           Ocean William Storm Hilbach
                     Mr. Hilbach is an Indigenous man from the Ermineskin Cree Nation. Nineteen years old and without the money to travel from the city to his reserve, he and his 13-year-old accomplice robbed a convenience store with an unloaded sawed-off rifle. Mr. Hilbach covered his face with his shirt and pointed the gun at two store clerks, demanding cash. His accomplice punched one of the store clerks, and kicked the other. They fled with $290 in lottery tickets and were apprehended soon afterwards.
                     Mr. Hilbach pleaded guilty to robbery while using a prohibited or restricted weapon (s. 344(1)(a)) and possession of a firearm while prohibited (s. 117.01(1)). The sentencing judge held that a fit and proper sentence for Mr. Hilbach was two years less a day. He concluded that the five-year mandatory minimum sentence under s. 344(1)(a)(i) was grossly disproportionate to Mr. Hilbach’s circumstances, contrary to s. 12 of the Charter, because it was more than double the length of a fit sentence and it would be served in a federal rather than provincial institution. Accordingly, he declared the provision of no force and effect (2018 ABQB 526, 75 Alta. L.R. (6th) 359).
                     The Court of Appeal allowed the Crown’s appeal in part. It held that the sentence imposed on Mr. Hilbach was unfit and substituted a sentence of three years for the robbery charge. But the court still concluded that the five-year mandatory minimum sentence would be grossly disproportionate for Mr. Hilbach, breaching s. 12. It could not be saved under s. 1 and was thus declared of no force and effect (2020 ABCA 332, 14 Alta. L.R. (7th) 245).
B.            Curtis Zwozdesky
                     At the time of the offence, Mr. Zwozdesky was 53 years old, unemployed, and struggling with drug addiction. He was the “getaway driver” for two robberies of rural convenience stores in Alberta. During the first robbery, he went inside the convenience store before returning to his car. Shortly after, his accomplices went inside with a modified shotgun. An accomplice pointed the gun at the clerk, demanded she fill a bag with money, and fired the shotgun into a shelf. No one was injured. The next robbery occurred a week later. Mr. Zwozdesky waited in the car as the two principal offenders went inside the store, brandished a shotgun, and sprayed a clerk with pepper spray before leaving, cash and cigarettes in hand.
                     Mr. Zwozdesky confessed to the police and entered a guilty plea to one count of robbery with a firearm (s. 344(1)(a.1)), and one count of robbery simpliciter (s. 344(1)(b)).
                     The sentencing judge concluded that the four-year sentence mandated by s. 344(1)(a.1) would not be grossly disproportionate for Mr. Zwozdesky. However, in considering other reasonably foreseeable applications of the law, she observed that armed robbery can occur in a wide variety of circumstances, including by youthful offenders acting impulsively, offenders with mental health issues, and offenders who played a more peripheral role in the offence. Reasoning that the mandatory minimum sentence could constitute cruel and unusual punishment for reasonably foreseeable offenders, and that it could not be saved under s. 1, she declared s. 344(1)(a.1) of no force and effect (2019 ABQB 322, 95 Alta. L.R. (6th) 386).
                     The majority of the Court of Appeal agreed that s. 344(1)(a.1) could result in grossly disproportionate punishments and dismissed the Crown’s appeal.
II.            Analysis
                     Mr. Hilbach challenged the mandatory five-year sentence for robbery with a prohibited or restricted firearm (s. 344(1)(a)(i)), while Mr. Zwozdesky challenged the mandatory four-year sentence for robbery with a non-restricted firearm (s. 344(1)(a.1)). In our view, both provisions violate s. 12 of the Charter. In evaluating whether a mandatory minimum sentence infringes s. 12 of the Charter, a court engages in a two‑step inquiry (Hills, at para. 40). 
                     First, the court must determine what constitutes a proportionate sentence for the offence having regard to the objectives and principles of sentencing in the Criminal Code, including the fundamental principle of sentencing under s. 718.1: “A sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.” In assessing an offence’s gravity, courts may consider the consequences of the offender’s actions on victims and public safety, the harm caused by the offence, and, in some cases, the offender’s motivations (Hills, at para. 58). In assessing the degree of responsibility of the offender, a court should gauge “the essential substantive elements of the offence including the offence’s mens rea, the offender’s conduct in the commission of the offence, the offender’s motive for committing the offence, and aspects of the offender’s background that increase or decrease the offender’s individual responsibility for the crime, including the offender’s personal circumstances and mental capacity” (Hills, at para. 58, citing R. v. Hamilton (2004), 2004 CanLII 5549 (ON CA), 72 O.R. (3d) 1 (C.A.), at para. 91; R. v. Boudreault, 2018 SCC 58, 3 S.C.R. 599, at para. 68; R. v. Ipeelee, 2012 SCC 13, 1 S.C.R. 433, at para. 73).
                     Second, the court must ask whether the mandatory minimum requires the judge to impose a sentence that is grossly disproportionate to the otherwise fit sentence. In considering whether the mandatory minimum sentence is grossly disproportionate, a court must assess “three crucial components”: (1) the scope and reach of the offence; (2) the effects on the offender, “both generally and based on their specific characteristics and qualities”; and (3) the penalty and the balance struck by its objectives (Hills, at paras. 122-38).
                     If the court concludes that a sentence is not grossly disproportionate for the offender in question, the court must then consider whether it would be grossly disproportionate in other reasonably foreseeable cases (R. v. Nur, 2015 SCC 15, 1 S.C.R. 773, at para. 65).
                     In applying this framework, neither s. 344(1)(a)(i) nor s. 344(1)(a.1) pass constitutional scrutiny. The sentencing judge correctly considered the facts, case law, and relevant sentencing objectives to determine that two years less a day was a fit and proportionate sentence in Mr. Hilbach’s circumstances. This determination is owed deference. In assessing a fit sentence, courts must not indiscriminately adhere to starting points, completely eliminate the prospect of rehabilitation, or distort the gravity of the offence by dismissing relevant facts (such as whether a firearm was loaded). Moreover, whether a fit sentence is two years or — as our colleague concludes — three years, a sentence that is double or nearly double a fit sentence is grossly disproportionate in violation of s. 12 of the Charter. 
                     The mandatory minimum sentence under s. 344(1)(a.1) is also grossly disproportionate. It is unconstitutionally broad and foreseeably applies to a wide range of situations, including those where the offender may be young, substance dependent, assisting the principal offender, or using a firearm like a BB gun. Applying the mandatory minimum sentence in some of these situations would be so excessive as to outrage standards of decency and thus would be unconstitutional (see Lloyd, at paras. 24 and 87).
                     Neither provision can be saved under s. 1.
                     We address each provision in turn.
A.           Section 344(1)(a)(i) of the Criminal Code
                     Section 344(1)(a)(i) applies when the offender commits robbery using a restricted or prohibited firearm. This appeal raises the question of whether the five-year sentence is grossly disproportionate for Mr. Hilbach or another reasonably foreseeable offender. We agree with both courts below and conclude that it would be for Mr. Hilbach. It is therefore unnecessary to consider other reasonably foreseeable applications of the law.
                     We turn, then, to address a fit sentence for Mr. Hilbach. Although both courts below agreed that a mandatory five-year sentence was grossly disproportionate in light of the fit sentence for Mr. Hilbach, they disagreed on what would be a fit sentence. The sentencing judge concluded two years less a day was fit, with reference to the three-year starting point for convenience store robberies in R. v. Johnas (1982), 1982 ABCA 331 (CanLII), 41 A.R. 183 (C.A.), at para. 19; while the Court of Appeal concluded that three years was fit, placing more emphasis on denunciation and deterrence. As we will explain, we see no reason to disturb the sentencing judge’s assessment.
                     The seriousness of the crime is evident from the circumstances, a fact not lost on the sentencing judge. He noted that Mr. Hilbach committed a “serious violent offence” with “the potential for great harm”, which would have a lasting impact on the victims and the community more broadly (para. 9). He also recognized that Mr. Hilbach’s prior criminal record and the breaches of his probation and firearm prohibition were serious aggravating factors on his sentence (paras. 10 and 12-13). These features made denunciation and deterrence “important considerations” (para. 20).
                     The sentencing judge balanced these considerations against Mr. Hilbach’s tragic personal circumstances. Abandoned by his parents as an infant, Mr. Hilbach was raised by his paternal grandparents, both residential school survivors. His childhood and adolescence were marked by poverty, a fractured family unit, physical abuse, and substance dependency. These circumstances shaped Mr. Hilbach’s course in life, and this crime was no different. For instance, Mr. Hilbach’s conduct was driven by poverty — he needed money to get home to his reserve but had none (para. 35). As the sentencing judge observed, “his personal, family and community history played a role in his actions that day” (para. 35).
                     These circumstances are precisely the kind of background or systemic factors that this Court has recognized as having a mitigating effect in sentencing (Ipeelee, at para. 73; R. v. Gladue, 1999 CanLII 679 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 688). Endemic poverty on reserves, intimately tied to the legacy of colonialism, is a common cause of crime for Indigenous peoples (Gladue, at para. 65). As the number of Indigenous offenders behind bars in Canada continues to soar, it is imperative that sentencing judges appropriately consider the unique social issues facing Indigenous peoples in Canada (see R. Mangat, More Than We Can Afford: The Costs of Mandatory Minimum Sentencing (2014), at pp. 30-34; I.F., Canadian Bar Association, at para. 24). The sentencing judge did not err in doing so.
                     The sentencing judge also correctly considered the effect of the sentence on the offender and concluded that “any period of incarceration will have a profound impact on Mr. Hilbach” due to his youth and history of gang affiliation (para. 14). A five-year penitentiary sentence, in other words, would undermine Mr. Hilbach’s rehabilitation, with counterproductive implications for public safety down the line. Although rehabilitation is not a principle of fundamental justice, removing it altogether from consideration can result in gross disproportionality. As this Court unanimously held in R. v. Bissonnette, 2022 SCC 23, “[t]o ensure respect for human dignity” — and therefore compliance with s. 12 of the Charter — “Parliament must leave a door open for rehabilitation, even in cases where this objective is of minimal importance” (para. 85). When a mandatory minimum compromises, rather than advances, the prospect of rehabilitation — as the sentencing judge found here — the result is a penalty unmoored from a basic tenet of our criminal justice system: respect for the inherent dignity of every individual (Bissonnette, at paras. 87-88). And quite simply, it shocks the conscience to send a youthful Indigenous offender to prison for five years when, according to the sentencing judge, doing so would harm both the offender and society (paras. 14 and 21). 
                     The Court of Appeal, however, concluded that the sentencing judge had erred in principle in failing to give sufficient weight to denunciation and deterrence and by overemphasizing Gladue factors (para. 49). The court concluded that an appropriate sentence was three years when appropriate weight was ascribed to those factors (para. 50).
                     However, “an appellate court may not intervene simply because it would have weighed the relevant factors differently” (R. v. Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64, 3 S.C.R. 1089, at para. 49; see also Lloyd, at paras. 52-53). We agree that denunciation and deterrence are important considerations, but there is no reason to interfere with the sentencing judge’s conclusion that a two-year prison sentence for a first-time offender would serve those objectives. Indeed, as this Court observed in Bissonnette, “the objectives of denunciation and deterrence are not better served by the imposition of excessive sentences” (para. 94). Moreover, this Court recognized in Boudreault that denunciation and deterrence should not be elevated over the principle of proportionality, the objective of rehabilitation, and Parliament’s intent to ameliorate the overrepresentation of Indigenous peoples in prison under s. 718.2(e) of the Criminal Code (paras. 81-83). We would defer to the discretion of the sentencing judge as to which sentencing objectives in s. 718 (such as denunciation, deterrence, and rehabilitation) to prioritize — and how much weight to afford to the secondary sentencing principles in s. 718.2 (such as parity and restraint) (Lacasse, at paras. 54‑55). We are not persuaded that he erred in exercising that discretion.  
                     Our colleague disagrees. She accepts that three years, or higher, would be fit and concludes that the sentencing judge erred by imposing a sentence that was a full year below the starting point for offences of this nature (paras. 50-51). But starting points do not answer the key question at this first stage, which is, in our colleague’s words: “. . . what specifically is the fit sentence for this individual offender?” (Hills, at para. 64). And starting points are tools, not straitjackets (R. v. Parranto, 2021 SCC 46, at para. 37; R. v. Friesen, 2020 SCC 9, 1 S.C.R. 424, at paras. 36-37; Lacasse, at para. 57). Deviation from a starting point — “no matter the degree of deviation” — does not in itself justify appellate intervention (Parranto, at para. 29). By defaulting to the starting point in Johnas, our colleague’s approach departs from the recent jurisprudence of this Court in Parranto, Friesen, and Lacasse.
                     Our colleague also notes that the “use of an unloaded prohibited firearm does not substantially reduce the offence’s gravity” (para. 55). While the use of an unloaded firearm may not substantially reduce an offence’s gravity — because either weapon inspires fear and is used for coercion — the two situations are not equivalent in terms of gravity or moral culpability. The use of an unloaded firearm necessarily poses a much lower risk to public safety. It is far more blameworthy to enter public spaces with a loaded gun, as this suggests an intention to resort to lethal force if necessary. The two situations, for the purpose of sentencing, cannot be equated. 
                     Even if our colleague and the Court of Appeal were correct and a fit sentence for Mr. Hilbach were three years in jail, we would still conclude, as did the Court of Appeal, that a sentence of five years was grossly disproportionate (para. 54). Our colleague’s conclusion otherwise is, with respect, untenable. It is hard to fathom how a sentence nearly double the amount of a proportionate sentence would not shock the conscience of Canadians. This does not accord with a purposive reading of s. 12, nor is it alive to the profound consequences of any incarceration on an offender’s life and liberty, let alone the secondary impacts on the offender and the offender’s family. 
                     Ultimately, we would not disturb the determination that a five-year penitentiary sentence would be grossly disproportionate in the circumstances. Since the mandatory minimum would be unconstitutional for Mr. Hilbach, it is unnecessary to consider reasonably foreseeable applications of the law.
B.            Section 344(1)(a.1) of the Criminal Code
                     The four-year mandatory minimum under s. 344(1)(a.1) applies if an offender commits robbery using a non-restricted or non-prohibited firearm. Before the Court of Appeal and this Court, Mr. Zwozdesky concedes that a four-year sentence was fit in his case. The question, then, is whether a four-year sentence is grossly disproportionate in other reasonably foreseeable cases. We conclude that it is. 
                     A four-year sentence reaches beyond the classic instance of robbery with a firearm and captures less egregious conduct. Section 344(1)(a.1) requires the offender to “use” the firearm during the offence. In R. v. Steele, 2007 SCC 36, 3 S.C.R. 3, this Court observed that the term “use”, in the context of other firearm offences, has been interpreted to include a wide range of behaviour including discharging the firearm, pointing the firearm, or even just revealing with words that a firearm is present (para. 27). To be “used”, the firearm need not have accessible ammunition (R. v. Covin, 1983 CanLII 151 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 725, at p. 730), nor does it have to be in the offender’s physical possession if it is readily at hand (Steele, at para. 32).
                     And not all firearms are highly regulated weapons. The definition of “firearm” captures any barrelled, projectile-firing device that can rupture an eye, which is the standard for determining whether the firearm can cause serious bodily injury or death (R. v. Dunn, 2013 ONCA 539, 117 O.R. (3d) 171, at para. 40, aff’d 2014 SCC 69, 3 S.C.R. 490). This includes firearms — like BB guns, paintball guns, or even nail guns — that can be obtained with relative ease at local commercial outlets.
                     Thus, while the objective gravity of robbery with a firearm is always serious, the gravity of the particular offence committed — which depends on the circumstances surrounding the offence — varies considerably (see Friesen, at para. 96). For instance, just as s. 344(1)(a.1) captures offenders brandishing shotguns who invade a home and steal from its occupants (R. v. Matwiy (1996), 1996 ABCA 63 (CanLII), 178 A.R. 356 (C.A.)), it would also capture an offender who snatches a purse from a stranger while armed with a BB gun (C.A. reasons, at para. 64; see also R. v. Smart, 2014 ABPC 175, 595 A.R. 266).
                     Further, a wide range of people commit armed robberies. At one end of the spectrum stands the seasoned criminal, who, motivated by greed and contempt, serially orchestrates sophisticated robbery heists undeterred by criminal sanction. At the other end of the spectrum stands the first-time offender with a tragic upbringing, who, fuelled by drug addiction, turns to robbery once to satisfy his need for a quick fix, and then successfully rehabilitates before sentencing. A four-year penitentiary sentence may be proportionate, or even lenient, in the former example, but may well be grossly disproportionate in the latter.
                     Considering such personal characteristics and circumstances sheds light on the reasonably foreseeable scope of the law (Hills, at paras. 58-61). It reflects the inherently individualized nature of sentencing and how proportionality involves an assessment of both the gravity of the offence and the blameworthiness of the offender (Nur, at para. 43).
                     Such an approach also reflects common sense. Given the vast overrepresentation of Indigenous peoples in our justice system, for example, cases involving such offenders are, as a matter of logic, reasonably foreseeable (Hills, at paras. 86-87). Indeed, mandatory minimum sentences disproportionately impact Indigenous offenders (Mangat, at pp. 30-34). Similarly, offenders who are poor, precariously housed, substance dependent, mentally ill, or disabled “appear with staggering regularity in our provincial courts” (Boudreault, at paras. 49-55). Consideration of these personal characteristics can ensure s. 12 of the Charter responds to the everyday composition of offenders in the criminal justice system (I.F., Canadian Bar Association, at para. 24).
                     That said, the types of foreseeable offenders a court may consider must not be stretched beyond reason to create far-fetched examples (Nur, at paras. 73-76). Extremely detailed hypotheticals, like those advanced by Mr. Zwozdesky, are ultimately unhelpful for this reason. Laws should not be set aside based on speculation. But so long as such examples are reasonable, this inquiry is central to the analysis: testing the reasonably foreseeable scope of a given punishment ensures that no individual is subject to an unconstitutional law, which in turn, allows s. 12 to be faithful to its purpose. 
                     Mr. Hilbach’s circumstances provide a reasonable hypothetical example. His conviction under s. 344(1)(a)(i) is more serious because it involved a prohibited firearm. But even then, the sentencing judge’s conclusion was that a fit sentence would have been two years less a day — half of the mandatory four-year sentence under s. 344(1)(a.1), which would be served in a federal penitentiary. Even were we to accept our colleague and the Court of Appeal’s conclusion that three years would have been fit, it follows that Mr. Hilbach should have received a lesser sentence had he used a non‑prohibited firearm and been convicted under s. 344(1)(a.1). While the court “need not fix the sentence or sentencing range at a specific point, particularly for a reasonable hypothetical case framed at a high level of generality”, it is helpful for the court to “consider, even implicitly, the rough scale of the appropriate sentence” (Lloyd, at para. 23). At most, a reformatory term would have been fit if Mr. Hilbach had committed his crime with a non-prohibited firearm. It follows that a four-year mandatory minimum would be more than merely excessive in the circumstances.
                     Additionally, it is not uncommon for crimes, like robbery, to be committed by more than one offender — one need only consider, for instance, the “getaway driver” (as in this case) or the “lookout”. And because “Canadian criminal law does not distinguish between the principal offender and parties to an offence in determining criminal liability” (R. v. Briscoe, 2010 SCC 13, 1 S.C.R. 411, at para. 13), someone who assists or encourages the principal offender is guilty of the same offence and faces the same mandatory minimum sentence. This is so even if their assistance or encouragement was not preplanned or significant.
                     Aiders and abetters may not automatically be entitled to a sentencing discount. But just because a party is criminally liable for the same offence as a principal offender does not mean they deserve the same sentence. As always, what constitutes a proportionate sentence will depend on the circumstances (Hills, at para. 58), most notably the offender’s degree of participation. Considering this context in sentencing does not undermine the party liability provisions, nor incite offenders to assist or encourage crime. Rather, it reflects the fundamental principle of sentencing under s. 718.1: a sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.
                     The Court of Appeal in Hilbach points out that secondary liability dramatically expands the scope of the offence even more, and further reveals that s. 344(1)(a.1) is constitutionally infirm (paras. 61 and 68). We agree that R. v. Link, 2012 MBPC 25, 276 Man. R. (2d) 157, is illustrative.
                     Ms. Link, an Indigenous woman, was barely 18 years old and had no prior criminal record when she agreed to participate in a convenience store robbery. Her battle with drug and alcohol addiction began at age 13, and led her to become enmeshed in a “destructive set of friends” (para. 32). At the time of the offence, she was homeless and in her words “stealing to survive” (para. 53). Unbeknownst to Ms. Link, her accomplice had an imitation handgun in his possession, which he pointed at a clerk during the robbery. She continued to stuff cartons of cigarettes into her bag after the gun was produced. The clerk described her as an “accomplice maybe?” and “flustered, not really involved” (para. 15). She was cooperative with police, remorseful, and turned her life around after the incident. The sentencing judge imposed an eight‑month conditional sentence order.
                     The Crown argues that Link is not a reasonably foreseeable application of the law: s. 344(1)(a.1) did not apply because an imitation handgun is not a “firearm”, and Ms. Link did not know her accomplice had the firearm on his person before the robbery. In our view, this argument misses the mark. The issue is whether the characteristics of the offender and their conduct can assist the court in its inquiry into reasonably foreseeable circumstances. While certain aggravating elements may have been missing in Ms. Link’s circumstances, we agree that the sentence imposed in Ms. Link’s case illuminates the nature of the offence of armed robbery, its broad sentencing range, and the kinds of people who commit it.
                     Whether or not the mens rea could have been established, or whether a handgun is real or an imitation, the circumstances of Link are not far-fetched. And the difference between an imitation handgun and a real handgun cannot account for the wide gulf between an eight-month sentence served in the community and a four-year penitentiary sentence. Ms. Link’s example is further demonstration that a reformatory sentence — if not less — could be a proportionate sanction under s. 344(1)(a.1). Four years in a federal institution would be grossly disproportionate in comparison.
                     Given the breadth of the definition of a firearm (including BB guns, paintball guns, and nail guns), the range of conduct captured by the offence (including the degree and nature of involvement in the crime, the level of violence, and the level of sophistication), as well as the prevalence of important, often intersecting, personal circumstances (including Indigeneity, youth, substance dependency, and rehabilitation efforts), it is reasonably foreseeable that a four-year penitentiary sentence would be a grossly disproportionate sentence for some offenders.
                     As a result, based on the reasonably foreseeable application of the law, we agree with the courts below that the mandatory minimum in s. 344(1)(a.1) contravenes s. 12 of the Charter.
C.            Section 1
                     The Crown does not advance any argument on s. 1 of the Charter and therefore has not discharged its burden of justifying the s. 12 infringement. The provisions cannot be saved under s. 1. 
III.         Disposition
                     We would thus declare ss. 344(1)(a)(i) and 344(1)(a.1) of no force and effect pursuant to s. 52(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982. We would dismiss the Crown’s appeal and maintain the orders of the Court of Appeal. 
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ca/scc/2023scc2.html
                             This appeal, and the companion appeal of R. v. Hilbach, 2023 SCC 3, provide the Court with an opportunity to clarify the legal principles that govern when the constitutionality of a mandatory minimum sentencing provision is challenged under s. 12 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. At issue in both appeals are three different offences under the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, which involve the use of a firearm. In this appeal, the appellant, Jesse Dallas Hills, was convicted of discharging a firearm into or at a home under s. 244.2(1)(a). Mr. Hills challenges the four‑year mandatory minimum sentence previously imposed by s. 244.2(3)(b) for this offence. The mandatory minimum sentence prescribed in s. 244.2(3)(b) was repealed after this appeal was heard. Despite this legislative change, the reasons examine the impugned mandatory minimum as previously enacted. In the companion case, Ocean William Storm Hilbach and Curtis Zwozdesky were convicted of armed robbery. They challenge, respectively, the five‑year mandatory minimum for robbery with a restricted or prohibited firearm under s. 344(1)(a)(i) and the former four‑year mandatory minimum for robbery with a firearm under s. 344(1)(a.1). The mandatory minimum sentence set out in s. 344(1)(a.1) was also repealed after the Hilbach appeal was heard.
                             In both appeals, the offenders argue that the prescribed mandatory minimum sentences constitute cruel and unusual punishment contrary to s. 12 of the Charter. They claim that these automatic sentences, which impose a stated minimum term of imprisonment, are grossly disproportionate to what would be a fit and appropriate punishment and therefore offend the Charter. Mr. Hills and Mr. Zwozdesky admit that the minimum sentences were warranted based on the facts of their cases, but nevertheless challenge the law based on how the sentencing provisions could reasonably apply to others for whom they claim the minimum penalties imposed would be constitutionally infirm punishments.
                             This is not the first time the constitutionality of mandatory minimum sentences has been before this Court. While these appeals reveal some of the challenges faced when determining whether a punishment is grossly disproportionate, there is no reason to upset sound and settled law and adopt the new approaches advocated by some parties, interveners and judges of the Alberta Court of Appeal. The principles for assessing whether a punishment is cruel and unusual are well established and were recently and unanimously affirmed in R. v. Bissonnette, 2022 SCC 23. In this decision, the Court seeks to provide further guidance, direction and clarity. These reasons offer a framework in response to submissions in both this appeal and in Hilbach. As such, I will not distinguish between submissions from counsel in both cases addressing suggested changes to the s. 12 framework.
                             In this appeal, I first set out the generally applicable framework and foundational principles for the s. 12 analysis and then apply them to Mr. Hills and, in Hilbach, to Mr. Hilbach and Mr. Zwozdesky. Whether a mandatory minimum is grossly disproportionate will depend upon the scope and reach of the offence, the effects of the punishment on the offender, and the penalty and its objectives. 
                             In respect of Mr. Hills, I conclude that s. 244.2(3)(b) is grossly disproportionate. Here, the evidence showed that numerous air‑powered rifles constituted “firearms”, including air-powered devices like paintball guns, even though they could not perforate the wall of a typical residence. It is also reasonably foreseeable that a young person could intentionally discharge such a “firearm” into or at a place of residence. This provision therefore applies to an offence that captures a wide spectrum of conduct, ranging from acts that present little danger to the public to those that pose a grave risk. Its effect at the low end of the spectrum is severe. The mandatory minimum cannot be justified by deterrence and denunciation alone, and the punishment shows a complete disregard for sentencing norms. The mandatory prison term would have significant deleterious effects on a youthful offender and it would shock the conscience of Canadians to learn that an offender can receive four years of imprisonment for firing a paintball gun at a home. As a result, s. 244.2(3)(b) imposes a mandatory minimum of four years’ imprisonment for a much less grave type of activity such that it is grossly disproportionate and amounts to cruel and unusual punishment. The Crown did not argue that s. 244.2(3)(b) could be saved under s. 1 of the Charter. Accordingly, I would allow the appeal. I address s. 344(1)(a)(i) and (a.1) in the companion case of Hilbach.
II.            Legislative Background
A.           The Challenged Mandatory Minimum 
                             Mr. Hills was subject to the mandatory minimum at issue after he pled guilty to the offence in s. 244.2(1)(a):
244.2 (1) Every person commits an offence
 
(a) who intentionally discharges a firearm into or at a place, knowing that or being reckless as to whether another person is present in the place; or
 
(b) who intentionally discharges a firearm while being reckless as to the life or safety of another person.
 
(2) For the purpose of paragraph (1)(a), place means any building or structure — or part of one — or any motor vehicle, vessel, aircraft, railway vehicle, container or trailer.
 
(3) Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1) is guilty of an indictable offence and
 
(a) if a restricted firearm or prohibited firearm is used in the commission of the offence or if the offence is committed for the benefit of, at the direction of or in association with a criminal organization, is liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than 14 years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of
 
(i) five years, in the case of a first offence, and
 
(ii) seven years, in the case of a second or subsequent offence; and
 
(b) in any other case, is liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than 14 years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of four years.
                             After leave to appeal was granted, Parliament introduced and passed An Act to amend the Criminal Code and the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, S.C. 2022, c. 15. The legislation received royal assent on November 17, 2022. It removed the mandatory minimum sentence prescribed in s. 244.2(3)(b). Mr. Hills’ offence no longer attracts a mandatory minimum. The parties do not rely on Parliament’s choice to remove this measure in their arguments. Further, the four-year mandatory minimum sentence was still in effect at the time of the hearing. While I acknowledge this legislative change, these reasons examine the provision as previously enacted with the applicable mandatory minimum term and as such, I will not address this issue further.
                             The actus reus of s. 244.2(1)(a) requires that an offender discharge a firearm into or at a “place” (as defined by s. 244.2(2)). It is significant, for this appeal, that “place” has a very wide meaning: it includes “any building or structure”, which encompasses anything from a windowless garden shed to a residential home. The mens rea for this offence contains two main components. First, the offender must intentionally discharge the firearm into or at a place. Second, in intentionally discharging the firearm into or at a place, the offender must know a person is present in the place or be reckless as to whether a person is present there (Vézina v. R., 2018 QCCA 739, at para. 27 (CanLII)). The actus reus does not require a person to be at the “place” where the firearm is discharged, only that the firearm be discharged into or at a place (para. 46). Thus, there is no requirement for a person to even be present when the firearm is discharged. 
                             Mr. Hills committed his offence using a hunting rifle, which is classified as an ordinary firearm. As a result, he was subject to the four‑year minimum for s. 244.2(1)(a) listed in s. 244.2(3)(b). To appreciate the scope of s. 244.2(1)(a) and the mandatory minimum sentence in question, it is necessary to review the meaning of a “firearm” under the Criminal Code and Canada’s regulatory scheme for firearms. 
B.            The Applicable Firearms Regime
                         Parliament regulates firearms through a variety of legislation including the licensing and registration regime in the Firearms Act, S.C. 1995, c. 39, and through criminal prohibitions in the Criminal Code (R. v. Nur, 2015 SCC 15, 1 S.C.R. 773, at para. 6; Reference re Firearms Act (Can.), 2000 SCC 31, 1 S.C.R. 783). This legislation forms the background to this appeal and given its complexity, it is important to appreciate its operation before turning to Mr. Hills’ challenge.
                         To start, s. 244.2(1)(a) incorporates the Criminal Code definition of a firearm. Section 2 of the Criminal Code generally defines a “firearm” as “a barrelled weapon from which any shot, bullet or other projectile can be discharged and that is capable of causing serious bodily injury or death to a person, and includes any frame or receiver of such a barrelled weapon and anything that can be adapted for use as a firearm”. While firearms are defined as “weapons”, they do not need to meet the Criminal Code definition of a weapon (R. v. Dunn, 2013 ONCA 539, 117 O.R. (3d) 171, at para. 66, aff’d 2014 SCC 69, 3 S.C.R. 490). 
                         Courts rely on the “pig’s eye test” to determine whether a barrelled weapon is capable of causing serious bodily injury or death and thus meets the definition of a “firearm” in the Criminal Code (Dunn, at paras. 8 and 40). The test asks whether a projectile fired from the device can rupture a pig’s eye, which is physiologically similar to a human eye (para. 8). Since a ruptured eye is a “serious bodily injury”, a “firearm” is any barrelled, projectile‑firing device capable of putting someone’s eye out (paras. 8 and 40). As the expert evidence on this appeal establishes, some air-powered devices, like BB guns, airsoft guns, and paintball guns, are capable of firing projectiles with enough velocity to rupture a pig’s eye. As a result, they can be classified as firearms under the Criminal Code. 
                         However, some air-powered devices that are “firearms” for the purposes of the Criminal Code are not subject to the Firearms Act’s licensing and registration regime. Indeed, the Criminal Code exempts some “firearms” from the Firearms Act. Specifically, at issue in this appeal is the exemption in s. 84(3)(d)(i):
(3) For the purposes of sections 91 to 95, 99 to 101, 103 to 107 and 117.03 of this Act and the provisions of the Firearms Act, the following weapons are deemed not to be firearms:
 
. . .
 
(d) any other barrelled weapon, where it is proved that the weapon is not designed or adapted to discharge
 
(i) a shot, bullet or other projectile at a muzzle velocity exceeding 152.4 m per second or at a muzzle energy exceeding 5.7 Joules . . . .
                         Under s. 84(3)(d)(i), some air-powered devices that meet the pig’s eye test and constitute firearms under the Criminal Code are nevertheless exempted from the Firearms Act, since their muzzle velocity falls at or below 152.4 metres per second. As a result, even though they are “firearms” for the purposes of the Criminal Code, they can be freely possessed without a firearms licence. 
                         The implication for this appeal is that some air-powered devices, which can be freely possessed in Canada, are “firearms” for the purposes of s. 244.2(1)(a). Put simply, an offender could be convicted under s. 244.2(1)(a) for firing a BB gun or a paintball gun at a shed. This offender would then be subject to the four‑year mandatory minimum. While s. 244.2(1)(a) may typically apply where an ordinary firearm is used (like Mr. Hills’ hunting rifle), it is possible for an offender to be convicted for using devices that are not known to inflict deadly force, like paintball guns. As I explain, this possibility underlies the constitutional frailty of the mandatory minimum at issue here. 
III.         Facts and Judicial History
                         During an incident on May 6, 2014, Mr. Hills attacked two vehicles and a residence. In the hours prior to the incident, Mr. Hills consumed a large volume of prescription medication and alcohol. Around midnight, while intoxicated, he left his home in Lethbridge, Alberta with a loaded .303 Enfield bolt action rifle and a baseball bat. The rifle was designed for big game hunting. 
                         Mr. Hills proceeded to swing his bat at a passing car before firing a shot at it. The driver called 9‑1‑1. Before police arrived, Mr. Hills turned his attention to an unoccupied parked car, and smashed its windows with the bat. Mr. Hills then approached a new target: a residential home. He fired a round that went through the home’s living room window and through a wall into a computer room before it stopped in a drywall stud and bookcase.
                         At the time Mr. Hills fired his shots, the home was occupied by two parents and their two children. The father was sitting in the computer room when Mr. Hills fired his first shot. The father left the computer room to investigate and heard another shot. He ran to alert the mother and pressed the panic alarm on his security system. He then heard what sounded like Mr. Hills trying to break through the front door. The father opened the door and yelled at Mr. Hills to get away. As the father grabbed an axe to defend himself, Mr. Hills fired again.
                         The father managed to retreat and call 9‑1‑1. He went to the basement with the rest of his family where they waited for police to arrive. When police arrived, they discovered several rounds had penetrated the home. The rounds were fired into areas of the home where a person could have been standing and hit.
                         After a preliminary inquiry, Mr. Hills pled guilty to four offences: discharging a firearm into or at a house contrary to s. 244.2(1)(a) of the Criminal Code, pointing a firearm at the occupant of a car, possession of a firearm without a licence, and mischief to property under $5,000. Mr. Hills was unable to recollect the events or the motive for his actions. 
A.           Alberta Court of Queen’s Bench, 2018 ABQB 945, 79 Alta. L.R. (6th) 161
                         At sentencing, Mr. Hills brought a challenge under s. 12 of the Charter to the mandatory minimum sentence of four years of imprisonment for intentionally discharging a non-restricted firearm into or at a house imposed by s. 244.2(3)(b). He argued that such a mandatory minimum sentence was grossly disproportionate in reasonably foreseeable scenarios and, therefore, constituted cruel and unusual punishment.
                         Mr. Hills relied on a scenario where the hypothetical culprit discharged a firearm that was incapable of penetrating a typical residential wall. A firearms expert, called on Mr. Hills’ behalf, tested eight different types of air‑powered pistols or rifles and concluded that while they met the Criminal Code definition of a firearm, many of them were incapable of penetrating the wall of a house.
                         The sentencing judge, in light of the expert evidence, agreed that s. 244.2(3)(b) was grossly disproportionate in the reasonably foreseeable scenario where “a young person intentionally discharges an air-powered pistol or rifle such as an airsoft pistol, BB gun, paintball marker, .177 calibre pellet rifle, a .22 calibre pellet pistol or pellet rifle at a residence” (para. 14). The culprit in this situation clearly committed an offence of lesser gravity than the other conduct caught by the provision: the behaviour was of low moral blameworthiness and the risk of harm was also low. He concluded the infringement of s. 12 could not be justified under s. 1 of the Charter.
                         Having concluded the mandatory minimum was unconstitutional, in a subsequent oral decision, the sentencing judge imposed a sentence of three and a half years of incarceration for Mr. Hills.
B.            Alberta Court of Appeal, 2020 ABCA 263, 9 Alta. L.R. (7th) 226
                         The Crown appealed both the finding that s. 244.2(3)(b) infringed s. 12 of the Charter and Mr. Hills’ sentence. The Alberta Court of Appeal allowed the appeal on both grounds, with each justice writing separately. 
                         Justice Antonio concluded the expert evidence was insufficient to establish the low gravity of the scenario considered by the sentencing judge. The expert did not exclude the possibility that rounds fired from an air-powered pistol or rifle could travel through a door or window. Nor had the sentencing judge accounted for the psychological harms flowing from the scenario. Regardless of the physical risk, psychological and social harm was inherent in the reckless use of a firearm. She distinguished Nur, reasoning that if it was not grossly disproportionate to impose a 40‑month sentence on a 19‑year‑old who possessed a loaded firearm in public, it was surely not grossly disproportionate to impose a 4‑year sentence where a firearm was actually discharged. In re-sentencing Mr. Hills, she concluded that the sentencing judge had underestimated the gravity of the offence and concluded an appropriate sentence was four and a half years of imprisonment. She, however, reduced the sentence to the minimum of four years to account for the time spent on appeal. She stayed the execution of the post-appeal portion of his sentence.
                         Justice O’Ferrall agreed with Antonio J.A. that s. 244.2(3)(b) complied with the Charter and with Antonio J.A.’s decision to impose the minimum sentence. Justice O’Ferrall added that this Court’s s. 12 jurisprudence ought to be revisited. He was troubled with the “air of unreality” associated with the use of “reasonable hypotheticals” and reasoned the s. 12 analysis should proceed based solely on the offender before the court (para. 103). Further, he questioned whether a grossly disproportionate sentence was an adequate measure of cruel and unusual punishment. Proportionality is not the fundamental purpose of sentencing and it is foreseeable that a grossly disproportionate sentence could sometimes be justified. 
                         Justice Wakeling joined O’Ferrall J.A. in calling for the Court to revisit its s. 12 jurisprudence. Justice Wakeling concluded s. 12 protects only against cruel and unusual punishment. Put differently, it does not protect against “usual” punishments, like imprisonment. Consequently, a “grossly disproportionate” prison sentence cannot engage s. 12. He criticized reasonable hypotheticals, reasoning that since s. 12 protects against an offender being subjected to cruel and unusual punishment, its plain language means an offender can only challenge the particular sentence to which they are subject. He added the method of reasonable hypotheticals would leave Canadians “aghast” that adjudicators rely on “make-believe” scenarios to evaluate the constitutionality of a sentencing provision (para. 263). Justice Wakeling went on to note that the results of Canadian sentencing are irrational and indefensible, which militate in favour of a narrow construction of s. 12. Applying his own personal method of fixing sentences, he would have sentenced Mr. Hills to approximately 5.9 years of imprisonment.
IV.         Issues
                         This appeal raises two questions. First, whether the mandatory minimum sentence mandated by s. 244.2(3)(b) of the Criminal Code constitutes cruel and unusual punishment such that it violates s. 12 of the Charter. Second, whether the Alberta Court of Appeal erred in failing to consider Mr. Hills’ Gladue report and his Métis status in re-sentencing him.
V.           Analysis
                         Mr. Hills concedes the mandatory minimum sentence is not grossly disproportionate on the facts of his case. He argues, however, that this high bar is met in reasonably foreseeable scenarios in which other differentially situated reasonably foreseeable offenders are likely to be involved. In particular, he says it is met in the hypothetical case of a youthful offender who fires an air-powered pistol or rifle at a house. The Crown concedes this scenario is reasonably foreseeable, but maintains the mandatory minimum sentence is not grossly disproportionate in this hypothetical. Before turning to Mr. Hills’ arguments, I will clarify the applicable framework for a challenge to a mandatory minimum sentence under s. 12 and address the proposals for revising this framework advanced by the Crown, several interveners, and the Court of Appeal.
A.           The Protection Against Cruel and Unusual Punishment Under Section 12 of the Charter
                         Section 12 of the Charter grants individuals a right not to be subjected to any cruel and unusual treatment or punishment by the state. As a threshold issue, an impugned measure must initially qualify as “treatment” or “punishment” to fall within s. 12. State action amounts to punishment where it: “(1) . . . is a consequence of conviction that forms part of the arsenal of sanctions to which an accused may be liable in respect of a particular offence, and either (2) . . . is imposed in furtherance of the purpose and principles of sentencing, or (3) . . . has a significant impact on an offender’s liberty or security interests” (Bissonnette, at para. 57, citing R. v. Boudreault, 2018 SCC 58, 3 S.C.R. 599, at para. 39, quoting R. v. K.R.J., 2016 SCC 31, 1 S.C.R. 906, at para. 41). Despite the views of O’Ferrall and Wakeling JJ.A., s. 12 is engaged here. This Court has consistently held that imprisonment, the “penal sanction of last resort”, clearly constitutes punishment (under both ss. 11 and 12 Charter jurisprudence) (R. v. Gladue, 1999 CanLII 679 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 688, at para. 36; see R. v. Smith, 1987 CanLII 64 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 1045, at p. 1077; Nur; R. v. Poulin, 2019 SCC 47, 3 S.C.R. 566, at para. 40).  
                         The underlying purpose of s. 12 is “to prevent the state from inflicting physical or mental pain and suffering through degrading and dehumanizing treatment or punishment. It is meant to protect human dignity and respect the inherent worth of individuals” (Quebec (Attorney General) v. 9147‑0732 Québec inc., 2020 SCC 32, at para. 51). Dignity evokes the idea that every person has intrinsic worth and is therefore entitled to respect, irrespective of their actions (Bissonnette, at para. 59).
                         The analytical approach under s. 12 spans many years and has been used to address different types of legal issues. Mandatory minimum sentences have been considered in Smith, R. v. Luxton, 1990 CanLII 83 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 711, R. v. Goltz, 1991 CanLII 51 (SCC), 3 S.C.R. 485, R. v. Morrisey, 2000 SCC 39, 2 S.C.R. 90, R. v. Ferguson, 2008 SCC 6, 1 S.C.R. 96, Nur, and most recently in R. v. Lloyd, 2016 SCC 13, 1 S.C.R. 130. A mandatory victim surcharge which applied to all offences was struck down in Boudreault; a mandatory weapons prohibition order was upheld in R. v. Wiles, 2005 SCC 84, 3 S.C.R. 895; and a sentence of life imprisonment with parole ineligibility of 10 years was upheld in R. v. Latimer, 2001 SCC 1, 1 S.C.R. 3. 
                         In Bissonnette, this Court invalidated the stacking of periods of parole ineligibility in cases of multiple murder convictions and reaffirmed and consolidated the well-established analytical approach under s. 12. Chief Justice Wagner, writing for a unanimous Court, emphasized the need for a purposive Charter interpretation which is generous and aimed at securing the full benefits of Charter protections for individuals (para. 98). Based on the purpose of s. 12, he concluded that a sentence that entirely negates the penal objective of rehabilitation violates human dignity and, therefore, contravenes s. 12 in a manner which could not be saved under s. 1 (para. 8).
                         Bissonnette also confirmed that s. 12 has two prongs that are united by their shared animating purpose of safeguarding human dignity. First, s. 12 protects against the imposition of punishment that is “so excessive as to be incompatible with human dignity” (para. 60). This prong of cruel and unusual punishment is concerned with the severity of a punishment — it queries not whether an impugned punishment is excessive or disproportionate, but whether its effects are grossly disproportionate to the appropriate punishment in a given case (paras. 61 and 68; Nur, at para. 39; Morrisey, at para. 26). Under the first prong, it is not the nature or type of punishment that is at issue, but the amount or quantity of punishment imposed: the focus is whether its particular effects make it grossly disproportionate and thereby constitutionally infirm (Bissonnette, at para. 62). 
                         Second, s. 12 protects against the imposition of punishment and treatment that are cruel and unusual because, by their very nature, they are “intrinsically incompatible with human dignity” (Bissonnette, at para. 60). Under the second prong, the focus is on the method of punishment. The narrow class of punishments that fall within the second category “will ‘always be grossly disproportionate’ because . . . [t]hese punishments are in themselves contrary to human dignity because of their ‘degrading and dehumanizing’ nature” (para. 64, quoting Smith, at p. 1073; 9147-0732 Québec inc., at para. 51).
                         Mandatory minimum sentences are analyzed under the first prong of s. 12. As their name suggests, Parliament has prescribed a minimum sentence which applies whenever a particular offence has been committed. They are “mandatory” in the sense that Parliament has not provided the safety valve of judicial discretion, exemptions, or escape clauses. 
                         Despite this absence of discretion, mandatory minimum sentence provisions have not been found to be inherently or presumptively unconstitutional. As this Court stated in Smith, “[t]he legislature may . . . provide for a compulsory term of imprisonment upon conviction for certain offences without infringing rights protected by s. 12 of the Charter” (p. 1077; see also p. 1072). Nevertheless, the absence of any discretion, as well as the manner of their operation, expose their constitutional vulnerabilities. Mandatory minimums can “function as a blunt instrument” and “deprive courts of the ability to tailor proportionate sentences at the lower end of a sentencing range” (Nur, at para. 44). In “extreme cases”, they may impose unjust sentences “because they shift the focus from the offender during the sentencing process in a way that violates the principle of proportionality” (para. 44). When the effects of the impugned punishment are grossly disproportionate to what would have been appropriate (Smith, at p. 1072), the punishment is cruel and unusual because it shows the “state’s complete disregard for the specific circumstances of the sentenced individual and for the proportionality of the punishment inflicted on them” (Bissonnette, at para. 61). 
                         I turn now to the framework this Court has developed to assess whether a sentence is grossly disproportionate. 
B.            The Framework for Assessing Grossly Disproportionate Sentences
(1)           Overview
                         To assess whether a mandatory minimum violates s. 12 of the Charter, this Court has developed a two-stage inquiry that involves a contextual and comparative analysis (Bissonnette, at para. 62). A court must:
1.     Assess what constitutes a fit and proportionate sentence having regard to the objectives and principles of sentencing in the Criminal Code (Bissonnette, at para. 63; Boudreault, at para. 46; Nur, at para. 46). 
2.     Consider whether the impugned provision requires the imposition of a sentence that is grossly disproportionate, not merely excessive, to the fit and proportionate sentence (Bissonnette, at para. 63; Nur, at para. 46; Smith, at p. 1072). The constitutional bar is set high to respect Parliament’s general authority to choose penal methods that do not amount to cruel and unusual punishment.
                         This two-part assessment may proceed on the basis of either (a) the actual offender before the court, or (b) another offender in a reasonably foreseeable case or hypothetical scenario (Bissonnette, at para. 63; Nur, at para. 77). 
                         Where the court concludes that the term of imprisonment prescribed by the mandatory minimum sentence provision is grossly disproportionate in either case, the provision infringes s. 12 and the court must turn to consider whether that infringement can be justified under s. 1 of the Charter if arguments or evidence to that effect are raised by the Crown (Boudreault, at para. 97; Nur, at para. 46).
(2)           Applying the Framework
                         Justices O’Ferrall and Wakeling, as well as several interveners, invite this Court to make several revisions to this accepted framework because they say it is difficult to apply and lacks cohesion. Many of their criticisms do not accept the principles of law contained in the majority judgments of this Court, but are instead grounded in dicta from dissenting opinions. Others endorse the existing framework and argue that those critical of it are really taking issue with the results it produces because they do not agree with them (see I.F., Canadian Civil Liberties Association, at paras. 27-32). These various criticisms and proposals will be considered in relation to the particular issues raised. I would, however, acknowledge from the outset that there are challenges and complexities which make it impractical to establish bright‑line rules that can be applied uniformly to mandatory minimum sentences under s. 12. 
                         The first stage of the s. 12 inquiry involves the individualized process of determining what a fit and proportionate sentence is for the particular (or representative) offender under consideration using the general sentencing principles set out by Parliament. While this is a daily occurrence in courts across this country, it involves a complex and multifactorial assessment. Judges are tasked with crafting sentences that balance various sentencing objectives, account for aggravating and mitigating factors, and are proportionate to the gravity of each offence and the moral blameworthiness of the offender. 
                         The second stage requires a contextual comparison between the fit sentence and the impugned mandatory minimum to see whether the latter complies with the widely-worded right set out in s. 12. Judges must consider the uniform and mandatory minimum sentence Parliament has selected for particular crimes. A mandatory minimum is a penal provision of a very different type in which Parliament has intentionally removed discretion and has instead given priority to certainty, deterrence, denunciation and sometimes removing the offender from society. It has not only specified a minimum penalty, it anticipates that the minimum penalty will apply automatically regardless of how the crime was committed or by whom. The same punishment or period of incarceration applies both to the full breadth of the conduct criminalized and to “everyone” who commits it, no matter how diversely situated. 
                         When comparing the sentence produced from the individual process under general sentencing principles with the uniform standard under the mandatory minimum, some mismatch or disproportion is very likely. As observed by Arbour J. in R. v. Wust, 2000 SCC 18, 1 S.C.R. 455, at para. 18: “Mandatory minimum sentences are not the norm in this country, and they depart from the general principles of sentencing expressed in the Code, in the case law, and in the literature on sentencing. In particular, they often detract from what Parliament has expressed as the fundamental principle of sentencing in s. 718.1 of the Code: the principle of proportionality.” 
                         It is not therefore the existence of some disproportion which will offend the grossly disproportionate requirement of s. 12. Stated otherwise, the analysis of the grossly disproportionate standard poses the following question: is the difference between the fit sentence and the mandatory minimum sentence so grossly disproportionate that it violates human dignity such that it amounts to cruel and unusual punishment? According to well‑established jurisprudence, the challenged penalty may be unfit, excessive and disproportionate, but it only crosses the constitutional line when it becomes grossly disproportionate. This question raises the common challenge of distinguishing the gradations and demarcations between related legal standards and reaching a conclusion about which legal standard is met. While it is frequently difficult to gauge questions of degree or to measure when something that is otherwise permitted has become grossly disproportionate, many legal standards require just this type of analysis. Whether under s. 12 or s. 7 of the Charter, there will be a continuum between exact fit and gross disproportion, and a judge not only has the authority to make such a determination, but is recognized as being well placed to do so: “This is the sort of inquiry judges have consistently conducted in Charter review” (Nur, at para. 60). 
                         In addition, assessing gross disproportionality may be more challenging in certain circumstances. This is because sometimes the difference between stages one and two will involve penalties which are of different types or fall within distinct categories. For example, there may be cases in which a fine would be a fit sentence but the impugned provision imposes imprisonment, or cases in which a discharge or conditional sentence would be fit but instead a custodial sentence is mandated by law. The disparity in such cases is more readily apparent because the comparison involves two different types of punishment and the effects are often more extreme. Other cases may involve a comparison between the term of a proportionate period of incarceration and the term of imprisonment contained in the mandatory minimum. In such cases the type of punishment is the same: imprisonment. Such cases ask decision makers to engage in normative reasoning and make a judgment call about when a sentence is so long it becomes grossly disproportionate. 
                         I do not accept that these challenges and complexities mean that the established framework has always been fundamentally flawed or has become unworkable. Indeed, many of the arguments accepted by O’Ferrall and Wakeling JJ.A. and advanced before us by the Attorney General of Ontario and others were also forcefully argued and firmly rejected by this Court in 2015 in Nur. Like the Court in that case, in my view, the jurisprudence continues to provide a principled approach to assess when the effects of a penalty are so undermining of human dignity that the penalty qualifies as cruel and unusual punishment. Elaborating on the multiple, sometimes nuanced, questions and normative standards that are/may be considered within the framework, should help bring an end to the “exaggerated debate” sometimes applied to s. 12 (para. 61, per McLachlin C.J.). While no major methodological shifts are warranted, the Court seeks to provide greater clarity and more guidance. 
C.            Stage One: Determining a Fit and Proportionate Sentence
                         In this section I outline the first stage of the s. 12 inquiry, which is how to determine a fit and appropriate sentence. I begin by addressing the situation in which the constitutional challenge involves the particular offender before the court. This will involve a familiar task: a full consideration of all relevant sentencing provisions in the applicable legislation and jurisprudence. Since proportionality in sentencing relates to the gravity of the offence and the moral culpability of the individual before the court, there will necessarily be a consideration of the circumstances of the commission of the offence and the personal characteristics of the offender. The goal should be to determine as specific a punishment as would emerge from a traditional sentencing hearing — especially because this is the penalty that would be served if the mandatory minimum were declared unconstitutional.
                         I then turn to cases in which the constitutional challenge involves the presentation of reasonably foreseeable offenders by way of hypothetical scenarios. Since what is being challenged is a law of general application, this Court has repeatedly used and authorized the use of reasonable hypotheticals to test the law’s scope, reach, nature and effects. I explain the purposes they serve and the limitations to which they are subject. They may include personal characteristics but they must be reasonable in the sense of being reasonably foreseeable and realistic. While a bit more flexibility is needed to determine what a proportionate sentence would be for a reasonably foreseeable offender, every attempt at precision is encouraged to ensure that the comparison under stage two may be conducted in a fair manner. 
(1)           Sentencing an Individual Offender
                         When the constitutional challenge to a mandatory minimum proceeds on the basis of the particular circumstances of the individual offender charged and convicted, the task for the judge at stage one of the s. 12 inquiry set out in Nur is a familiar one: to determine a fit and proportionate sentence for the particular offender before the court. In this section I provide an overview of the relevant sentencing provisions and principles, with a focus on the need for a fit, proportionate and precise sentence, having regard to the offender’s personal characteristics and the circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence. 
(a)           General Sentencing Principles
                         The general principles of sentencing in the Criminal Code and the common law govern when evaluating the just and appropriate sentence for the actual or reasonably foreseeable offender (Nur, at paras. 40-42). Each sentence must be selected based on the particular facts of the case and in light of existing case law (R. v. Nasogaluak, 2010 SCC 6, 1 S.C.R. 206, at para. 43). Courts should employ sentencing tools and guides that are most relevant to their jurisdiction. In crafting a fit sentence, judges may reference sentencing ranges or starting points as appropriate to reach a proportionate sentence, so far as these tools align with established principles and objectives of sentencing (see R. v. Parranto, 2021 SCC 46, at para. 16).
                         To assist in evaluating what constitutes a just and appropriate punishment in a given case, Parliament enacted s. 718 of the Criminal Code (or s. 38 of the Youth Criminal Justice Act, S.C. 2002, c. 1, where appropriate). Proper consideration is to be given to various objectives such as denunciation, deterrence, rehabilitation, providing reparations for harm done to victims, promoting a sense of responsibility and, when necessary, separating offenders from society. No sentencing objective should be applied to the exclusion of all others. Courts should also consider any aggravating and mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or to the offender. 
                         In addition, s. 718.2(e) of the Criminal Code provides a mandatory direction to consider the unique situation of Aboriginal offenders for all offences (Gladue, at para. 93; R. v. Ipeelee, 2012 SCC 13, 1 S.C.R. 433, at paras. 84-85). Sentencing judges must consider the systemic or background factors which may have played a part in bringing the particular Aboriginal offender before the court and the types of sentencing procedures and sanctions which may be appropriate in the circumstances for that offender. Sanctions other than imprisonment are to be considered. While this Court has not addressed the issue, certain provincial courts of appeal have found that, in the case of Black offenders and groups who experience systemic discrimination, social context evidence or background factors which may have contributed to the offender being before the court can also serve as a mitigating factor at sentencing (see, e.g., R. v. Morris, 2021 ONCA 680, 159 O.R. (3d) 641, at paras. 13 and 87-95; R. v. Anderson, 2021 NSCA 62, 405 C.C.C. (3d) 1, at para. 114).
(b)          Proportionality 
                         Proportionality is a “central tenet” of Canada’s sentencing regime, with roots that predate the recognition of it as the fundamental principle of sentencing in s. 718.1 of the Criminal Code (Ipeelee, at para. 36, citing R. v. Wilmott (1966), 1966 CanLII 222 (ON CA), 58 D.L.R. (2d) 33 (Ont. C.A.); see R. v. Solowan, 2008 SCC 62, 3 S.C.R. 309, at para. 12; Nasogaluak, at paras. 40-42; R. v. M. (C.A.), 1996 CanLII 230 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 500, at paras. 40-42). Indeed, “whatever weight a judge may wish to accord to the objectives [for sentencing prescribed in ss. 718 to 718.2 of the Criminal Code], the resulting sentence must respect the fundamental principle of proportionality” (Nasogaluak, at para. 40 (emphasis in original)). 
                         The purpose of proportionality is founded in “fairness and justice” (R. v. Priest (1996), 1996 CanLII 1381 (ON CA), 30 O.R. (3d) 538 (C.A.), at p. 546). It is to prevent unjust punishment for the “sake of the common good” (p. 547) and it serves as a limiting function to ensure that there is “justice for the offender” (Ipeelee, at para. 37). As the “sine qua non of a just sanction” (para. 37), the concept expresses that the amount of punishment an offender receives must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the offender’s moral blameworthiness (R. v. Safarzadeh-Markhali, 2016 SCC 14, 1 S.C.R. 180, at paras. 70-71; R. v. Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64, 3 S.C.R. 1089, at paras. 51‑54; Ipeelee, at paras. 36 and 38; Nur, at para. 43; C. C. Ruby, Sentencing (10th ed. 2020), at §2.14).
                         The “gravity of the offence” refers to the seriousness of the offence in a general sense and is reflected in the potential penalty imposed by Parliament and in any specific features of the commission of the crime (R. v. Hamilton (2004), 2004 CanLII 5549 (ON CA), 72 O.R. (3d) 1 (C.A.), at para. 90). The gravity of the offence should be measured by taking into account the consequences of the offender’s actions on victims and public safety, and the physical and psychological harms that flowed from the offence. In some cases where there is bias, prejudice or hatred, the motivation of the offender may also be relevant (see s. 718.2(a)(i) of the Criminal Code). The offender’s moral culpability or degree of responsibility should be measured by gauging the essential substantive elements of the offence including the offence’s mens rea, the offender’s conduct in the commission of the offence, the offender’s motive for committing the offence, and aspects of the offender’s background that increase or decrease the offender’s individual responsibility for the crime, including the offender’s personal circumstances and mental capacity (Hamilton, at para. 91; Boudreault, at para. 68; Ipeelee, at para. 73).
                         Further, the sentence imposed must be commensurate with the responsibility and “moral blameworthiness of the offender” (Ipeelee, at para. 37). The sentence must be no greater than the offender’s moral culpability and blameworthiness (Nasogaluak, at paras. 40-42; M. (C.A.), at para. 40; R. v. Martineau, 1990 CanLII 80 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 633, at p. 645).
                         In setting out the two‑stage process in Nur, McLachlin C.J. said at para. 46: 
First, the court must determine what constitutes a proportionate sentence for the offence having regard to the objectives and principles of sentencing in the Criminal Code. Then, the court must ask whether the mandatory minimum requires the judge to impose a sentence that is grossly disproportionate to the fit and proportionate sentence.  
Based on this passage, some argue that the first stage is limited to consideration of a proportionate sentence solely for the offence. The claim is that only the nature of the offence governs and there is no room to take into account other aspects of proportionality, like moral blameworthiness or the personal characteristics of the offender. 
                         With respect, this narrow reading is incomplete and suggests that McLachlin C.J. chose, without any explanation, to only reference half of the well‑known whole of proportionality. It is more sensible to read her reference to a “proportionate sentence” as incorporating both the gravity of the offence and the moral blameworthiness of the offender. Her requirement that the sentence be assessed according to the objectives and principles of sentencing in the Criminal Code expressly acknowledges and incorporates the offender’s personal characteristics and circumstances. Under those principles, there is no proportionate sentence that only takes into account the offence and ignores the offender. The sentencing contemplated at the first stage in Nur therefore encompasses both aspects of proportionality.
(c)           The Sentence Should Be Specific and Defined
                         Sentencing is a highly individualized and discretionary endeavour (R. v. Suter, 2018 SCC 34, 2 S.C.R. 496, at para. 4; M. (C.A.), at para. 92). Each sentence is to be custom tailored to match the particular offence, as well as the offender (R. v. Bottineau, 2011 ONCA 194, 269 C.C.C. (3d) 227; R. v. Angelillo, 2006 SCC 55, 2 S.C.R. 728; R. v. Shoker, 2006 SCC 44, 2 S.C.R. 399). There is no “one size fits all” penalty (R. v. Lee, 2012 ABCA 17, 58 Alta. L.R. (5th) 30, at para. 12), as sentencing is “an inherently individualized” and “profoundly subjective process” (M. (C.A.), at para. 92; R. v. Shropshire, 1995 CanLII 47 (SCC), 4 S.C.R. 227, at para. 46):
The determination of a just and appropriate sentence is a delicate art which attempts to balance carefully the societal goals of sentencing against the moral blameworthiness of the offender and the circumstances of the offence, while at all times taking into account the needs and current conditions of and in the community.
 
(M. (C.A.), at para. 91)
                         During the course of argument, counsel often argue for a punishment within a certain sentencing range, or courts of appeal establish ranges or starting points to pursue parity. Nevertheless, a sentencing judge cannot at the end of the day simply approximate a sentence or otherwise provide a range of penalties. The judge is expected to articulate an individual, specific and defined sentence. They cannot order that an offender be imprisoned for around two or three months, or that a sentence be “around three years” or “fall within the range of time”. Judges must exercise their discretion in each case and fix a specific and defined punishment. 
                         Sentencing is not an exact science. It can be difficult for sentencing judges to select the exact fit punishment as there is often more than one correct sentencing response to a crime (Hamilton, at paras. 85 and 156; Ruby, at §2.5; Shropshire, at para. 48, citing R. v. Muise (1994), 1994 NSCA 198 (CanLII), 94 C.C.C. (3d) 119 (N.S.C.A.), at pp. 123-24). However, that is the burden sentencing judges confront daily. At this first stage of s. 12, while there may be reference to sentencing ranges and starting points for the offence to assist in the determination of the fit penalty, there should be no approximation in the final sentence. The key question is: what specifically is the fit sentence for this individual offender?
                         Precision and certainty about the legal penalty is required because all must know exactly what punishment was imposed and when it will end. Similarly, if the mandatory minimum falls, the sentence affixed by the judge at the first stage of Nur will be applied to the offender. Scrupulously selecting a precise and defined sentence also supports an analytically fair and principled result at the second stage of the s. 12 inquiry. 
                         When Lamer J. in Smith, at p. 1073, wrote that a court must first consider “the particular circumstances of the case in order to determine what range of sentences would have been appropriate to punish, rehabilitate or deter this particular offender”, he was talking about how to assess gross disproportionality at the second stage of the analysis — not how to conduct a sentencing hearing. He did not say that setting the fit and proportionate sentence at the first stage could involve a “range of sentences” as urged upon us by some interveners. Even reasonably foreseeable offenders, for whom there is greater latitude, call for careful calibration of discretion and as specific a sentence as required in a traditional and typical sentencing proceeding.
(2)           Sentencing Reasonably Foreseeable Offenders and the Use of Reasonable Hypotheticals
                         In other cases, the courts will be asked to consider the circumstances of reasonably foreseeable offenders not before them. In these cases, the constitutional analysis will be supplemented by or conducted on the basis of reasonable hypothetical scenarios that raise realistic issues about the scope of the mandatory minimum and its application to everyone. Justices O’Ferrall and Wakeling propose that this Court abandon the use of reasonably foreseeable scenarios. In my opinion, this proposal runs counter to the jurisprudence of this Court and lacks merit. In this section, I explain that reasonably foreseeable hypotheticals are an accepted and appropriate tool to identify the scope and thus explore the constitutionality of an impugned provision. I address how to construct a reasonably foreseeable hypothetical; discuss why personal characteristics, including Indigeneity, are not excluded from consideration; and suggest that the hypothetical should be reasonable and is best tested through the adversarial process. 
(a)           Reasonably Foreseeable Hypotheticals Are an Accepted and Appropriate Analytical Tool
                         As s. 12 jurisprudence has developed, this Court has consistently accepted that punishments can be impugned not only on the basis that they infringe the s. 12 rights of a particular offender, but also on the basis that they infringe those of a reasonably foreseeable offender. Beginning in Smith, this Court established the use of a reasonable hypothetical in assessing whether a punishment is grossly disproportionate. The majority in that case struck down a mandatory minimum of seven years for importing narcotics because such a sentence would be grossly disproportionate if applied to a hypothetical young person driving home to Canada with a small amount of marijuana.
                         Since Smith, reasonable hypothetical situations have been either expressly used by this Court to invalidate sentencing provisions (see Nur, at paras. 82-83; Lloyd, at paras. 32-33; Boudreault, at para. 55), or affirmed as a matter of principle where they were not relied upon (see Goltz, at p. 515; Morrisey, at paras. 31 and 51-53; Ferguson, at para. 30; Bissonnette, at para. 63). Importantly, in the three cases in which this Court has struck down mandatory minimums, it has done so on the basis of a reasonable hypothetical offender (Smith, Nur and Lloyd).
                         Beyond s. 12, the assessment of a law’s scope based on reasonable hypotheticals is an accepted analytical inquiry in Charter challenges more generally. They have been relied upon as an analytical tool in s. 7 jurisprudence, resulting in successful Charter challenges (R. v. Heywood, 1994 CanLII 34 (SCC), 3 S.C.R. 761, at p. 799; R. v. Appulonappa, 2015 SCC 59, 3 S.C.R. 754, at paras. 29-30 and 72-75; R. v. Ndhlovu, 2022 SCC 38, at paras. 87-88).
                         This Court in Nur set out certain binding principles about the use of reasonable hypotheticals. Chief Justice McLachlin said the use of reasonable hypotheticals was “at the heart of th[e] case” (para. 47) and placed them at the protected core of the s. 12 analysis. This Court firmly and clearly rejected the argument that reasonable hypotheticals should be abandoned and that the primary or exclusive focus ought to be on the offender before the court (paras. 48-64; see also C. Fehr, “Tying Down the Tracks: Severity, Method, and the Text of Section 12 of the Charter” (2021), 25 Can. Crim. L.R. 235, at p. 240). Even as early as 2015, it was recognized that “excluding consideration of reasonably foreseeable applications of a mandatory minimum sentencing law would run counter to the settled authority of this Court and artificially constrain the inquiry into the law’s constitutionality” (Nur, at para. 49).
                         Foreclosing the consideration of the reasonably foreseeable impacts of an impugned law “would dramatically curtail the reach of the Charter and the ability of the courts to discharge their duty to scrutinize the constitutionality of legislation and maintain the integrity of the constitutional order” (Nur, at para. 63). Because it is the “nature of the law” that is at issue, not the claimant’s status, it suffices for a claimant to allege unconstitutional effects in their case or on third parties (para. 51, quoting R. v. Big M Drug Mart Ltd., 1985 CanLII 69 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 295, at p. 314). In crafting reasonable hypotheticals, a court is examining the scope of the impugned law and “not merely the justice of a particular sentence imposed by a judge at trial” (Goltz, at p. 503; see Big M Drug Mart, at p. 314; Nur, at para. 60). Further, “[i]f the only way to challenge an unconstitutional law were on the basis of the precise facts before the court, bad laws might remain on the books indefinitely” (Nur, at para. 51).
                         The effective use of judicial resources also favours the use of reasonable hypotheticals as they allow one judge to consider an impugned mandatory minimum from multiple vantage points and they help reduce the number of challenges that will be heard in or among jurisdictions. Importantly, they promote the rule of law by underscoring how no one should be convicted or sentenced under an unconstitutional law (Lloyd, at para. 16). Hence, “allowing accused to employ reasonable hypothetical scenarios is more likely to further the purpose of the Charter: protecting citizens from abuse of state power” (Fehr, at p. 236). 
                         It is for these reasons that, to repeat McLachlin C.J., “[t]his Court has consistently held that a challenge to a law under s. 52 of the Constitution Act, 1982 does not require that the impugned provision contravene the rights of the claimant” (Nur, at para. 51; see also Goltz, at pp. 503-4). Under well-established case law, there is no need to wait for a “real” offender to appear to impugn the constitutionality of a provision of general application. 
                         Justices O’Ferrall and Wakeling’s desire to excise the use of reasonably foreseeable scenarios from this Court’s s. 12 framework is thus completely contrary to both precedent and principle. They rely upon certain parts of dissenting judgments from this Court and fail to follow the repeated authoritative statements that reasonable hypotheticals are an established device courts use to measure whether a legislatively mandated sentence is cruel and unusual punishment under s. 12 (S. Chaster, “Cruel, Unusual, and Constitutionally Infirm: Mandatory Minimum Sentences in Canada” (2018), 23 Appeal 89, at p. 96).
(b)          Defining the Parameters of a Reasonably Foreseeable Hypothetical
                         A reasonable hypothetical scenario needs to be constructed with care. While it may be tempting to allow the word “hypothetical” to overwhelm, it is the reasonableness of the scenario that must be underscored (Nur, at para. 57). While earlier case law did not often explain or explore what went into the construction of a reasonable hypothetical, or tended to consider hypotheticals more narrowly and at a higher level of generality, the more recent analytical approach in Nur, Lloyd, and Boudreault is broader and permits more detailed hypotheticals. 
                         The characteristics of a reasonable hypothetical include the following:
(i)       The hypothetical must be reasonably foreseeable;
(ii)    Reported cases may be considered in the analysis;
(iii)  The hypothetical must be reasonable in view of the range of conduct in the offence in question;
(iv)   Personal characteristics may be considered as long as they are not tailored to create remote or far-fetched examples; and
(v)     Reasonable hypotheticals are best tested through the adversarial process.
(i)             The Hypothetical Must Be Reasonably Foreseeable
                         Throughout the case law there is a legitimate concern that the hypotheticals must be reasonable. They ought not to be “far-fetched or marginally imaginable cases”, nor should they be “remote or extreme examples” (Morrisey, at para. 30, quoting Goltz, at pp. 506 and 515). In Goltz, the Court focussed on circumstances that “could commonly arise in day‑to‑day life” (p. 516). 
                         Greater flexibility was introduced in Nur when the Court held that the appropriate approach is to construct a reasonably foreseeable offender with characteristics and in circumstances that are reasonably foreseeable based on judicial experience and common sense (para. 62). Nur’s selection and use of reasonable foreseeability is significant and goes beyond whether a projected application of the law is common or likely:
The reasonable foreseeability test is not confined to situations that are likely to arise in the general day‑to‑day application of the law. Rather, it asks what situations may reasonably arise. It targets circumstances that are foreseeably captured by the minimum conduct caught by the offence. Only situations that are “remote” or “far-fetched” are excluded . . . . [para. 68]
                         Thus, what must be considered is how the provision impacts other persons who might reasonably be caught by it (Nur, at para. 47) and the reasonably foreseeable situations in which the law may apply.
(ii)          Reported Cases May Be Considered in the Analysis
                         In defining the scope of the hypothetical scenario and the qualities of a reasonably foreseeable offender, courts may rely on reported cases, as this Court did in Boudreault. While marginal cases may be excluded (Morrisey), in Nur, the Court affirmed that reported cases can be used because they not only illustrate the range of real‑life conduct captured by the offence, they actually “happened” (para. 72). Reported cases, while potentially helpful, should not be used as a licence or straitjacket and courts may modify the facts of a reported case to illustrate reasonably foreseeable scenarios (paras. 62 and 72). However, courts are not limited to hypotheticals from the cases available to them.
(iii)        The Hypothetical Must Be Reasonable in View of the Range of Conduct in the Offence in Question
                         Under s. 12, the reach, breadth and scope of the impugned law will figure prominently. It can be expected that the proffered hypotheticals will test the kind of conduct the impugned provision is reasonably expected to catch and the law’s reasonably foreseeable effects (Nur, at para. 62). 
                         To be reasonable, the hypothetical must be tailored to the offence in question. It needs to involve conduct that falls within the relevant provision. The scope of the offence can be explored and it is permissible to establish the breadth of the offence by reference to how it may be committed and by whom. However, straining each and every constituent element by fanciful facts is not helpful. Incredible combinations of bizarre behaviours tells a court more about the imagination of counsel than it does the true scope of the impugned provision. The total scenario must be reasonably foreseeable.
(iv)         Personal Characteristics May Be Considered as Long as They Are Not Tailored to Create Remote or Far-fetched Examples
                         Several interveners in this appeal and in Hilbach seek to curtail the use of personal characteristics in crafting reasonable hypotheticals. The Attorney General of Ontario, for instance, proposes that “generic” mitigating personal circumstances that are not “specific” to the offence, like Indigeneity, should be excluded from reasonable hypotheticals (I.F., at paras. 13-20; transcript, at pp. 117-18). Counsel submits that immutable personal characteristics, like race, gender, age, or mental health factors do not contribute information that goes directly to the offence and therefore “should be excluded from the generalized inquiry” (transcript, at p. 119). Counsel posits that it is not enough for a scenario to be “theoretically possible”; it must also be “expected” to arise (pp. 120-21). In the Attorney General of Ontario’s view, characteristics like race or Indigeneity are not “expected” characteristics appropriate for use in reasonable hypotheticals. In contrast, the Director of Public Prosecutions accepts that Indigeneity can be a proper part of a reasonable hypothetical.
                         Similar arguments were rejected in Nur when the Court held that such characteristics could not be abstracted out of the test. Instead, an “inquiry into reasonably foreseeable situations the law may capture may take into account personal characteristics relevant to people who may be caught by the mandatory minimum” (para. 76). In that case, the Court actually invalidated the law on the basis of a hypothetical involving a licensed and responsible gun owner who improperly and unwittingly stored a licensed weapon in a manner that infringed the statute (para. 82). Similarly, in Lloyd, the Court struck down the one‑year minimum sentence for certain drug-related offences on the basis of two different scenarios. The hypotheticals were detailed: one concerned a marginalized person who experienced poverty, completed rehabilitation for a substance use disorder and had a dated prior conviction. In the other hypothetical, a person shared a small quantity of drugs with a friend or spouse. In Boudreault, this Court realistically considered the varied life circumstances of individual offenders, including poverty, illness, disability, addiction or other disadvantages which could reduce an offender’s moral blameworthiness, thus illustrating the actual and foreseeable characteristics of real offenders (paras. 55 and 58). 
                         This Court should not depart from the methodology and approach affirmed in Nur, Lloyd, and Boudreault. As a rule, characteristics that are reasonably foreseeable for offenders in Canadian courtrooms, like age, poverty, race, Indigeneity, mental health issues and addiction, should not be excluded from consideration. Proportionality, a mandatory principle of sentencing under the Criminal Code, requires a consideration of the gravity of the offence and the offender’s particular circumstances, which include their personal characteristics (Nasogaluak, at para. 42; Ipeelee, at para. 38). The assessment of a mandatory minimum’s constitutionality should also be similarly rooted in the realities of people’s lives. 
                         Given mandatory sentencing provisions and modern realities, there is no principled reason why race and Indigeneity may not also be relevant legal personal characteristics for reasonable hypothetical scenarios. Section 718.2(e) of the Criminal Code is mandatory and was enacted to address the overincarceration of Indigenous people and their disproportionate representation in Canada’s criminal justice system. The unfortunate truth is that Indigeneity is an offender characteristic that is more than “theoretically possible”. Indigenous offenders are not only reasonably foreseeable in the sense contemplated by Nur, the statistics over the years demonstrate that Indigenous people are vastly overrepresented before the courts. The same is true for Black and other racialized offenders who are overrepresented in the criminal justice system and whose experiences of historic and systemic disadvantage may reduce their moral blameworthiness (Ipeelee, at para. 73; Anderson, at para. 146; Morris, at para. 179).
                         The concern underlying the position of the Attorney General of Ontario is that if personal characteristics, like Gladue factors, are taken into account, then the fit sentence will be so reduced at the first stage that the disproportion would become greater at the second stage, thereby rendering mandatory minimums more constitutionally fragile (D. Stuart, “Boudreault: The Supreme Court Strikes Down Mandatory Victim Surcharges to Protect Vulnerable Offenders” (2019), 50 C.R. (7th) 276). I do not accept that any constitutional issue which may arise in such circumstances will be the result of the hypothetical proffered rather than the scope and legal effects of the mandatory minimum. As explained further under stage two, the constitutional bar is set high at gross disproportionality. Section 12 is not violated due to the absence or presence of one sentencing principle, even one as important as s. 718.2(e), and where the offence involves grave conduct, the personal characteristics and circumstances of the offender will necessarily carry less significance (Latimer, at para. 85).
                         Parliament is taken to know that the mandatory minimum it selects applies to “everyone”, just like the s. 12 right against cruel and unusual punishment. That means all people, regardless of their personal characteristics, are to benefit from the protections of s. 12. Canada is a large and diverse country and people will have personal characteristics which may aggravate or mitigate their moral blameworthiness. It is appropriate that the effects of a mandatory minimum be scrutinized based not only on the reach of the law and the length of the sentence selected, but also on the breadth of the population to which it is made to apply. 
                         Including immutable personal characteristics in hypothetical scenarios strengthens the analytical device by helping courts explore the reach of the mandatory penalty. Individuals with reduced culpability may find themselves subject to mandatory minimum penalties. It is possible Parliament set penalties with a certain offender in mind without fulsome consideration of how the mandatory penalty may apply to offenders with reduced moral blameworthiness due to their disadvantaged circumstances, including marginalization or systemic discrimination. 
                         There is an important limit on the use of personal characteristics: the scenarios should not involve the most “sympathetic” offender but rather present a reasonably foreseeable offender (Nur, at para. 75). The hypothetical cannot be remote, far-fetched or utterly unrealistic (para. 76). A court should be wary of detailed scenarios that stack mitigating factors combined with an interpretation that stretches and strains the technical meaning of the offence, like certain of Mr. Zwozdesky’s hypotheticals in the companion appeal to this case (Hilbach, at para. 89). 
                         It makes little sense to evaluate scenarios that, based on common sense and judicial experience, appear outlandish. As Canadian courtrooms illustrate, on occasion truth may be stranger than fiction. That should not, however, become an invitation to consider every “sympathetic” case on the theory that it could or might happen one day. There may be the rare case in which all of the factors are mitigating and operate to reduce the moral blameworthiness of the offender but judicial experience points to the need to ensure the scenario as a whole is reasonably foreseeable. As McLachlin C.J. wrote in Nur, “[l]aws should not be set aside on the basis of mere speculation” (para. 62).
(v)           Reasonable Hypotheticals Are Best Tested Through the Adversarial Process
                         It is up to the offender/claimant to articulate and advance the reasonably foreseeable hypothetical which forms the basis for the claim that the impugned provision is unconstitutional. All parties should ideally be afforded a fair opportunity to challenge or comment upon the reasonableness of the hypothetical before making submissions on its constitutional implications. In this respect, it is commonplace for courts to question counsel about the content and contours of any scenario put forward as a reasonable hypothetical. This is a sound practice which brings transparency to the arguments and fairness to the process. I agree with Antonio J.A. that reasonable hypotheticals are best tested through the rigour of the adversarial process (para. 69). There are benefits to providing parties with the opportunity to make submissions on who constitutes a realistic and reasonably foreseeable offender. In this way, the parties can help the judge determine what type of hypothetical is reasonable in the circumstances. However, while testing the reasonable hypothetical through the adversarial process is to be encouraged, it is not mandatory in the sense that its absence represents a reviewable error. 
(c)           Sentencing a Reasonably Foreseeable Offender
                         The same general sentencing principles apply when fixing a sentence for a reasonably foreseeable offender. This means that sentencing judges will: be bound by the Criminal Code; consider the sentencing proposals argued by counsel; and utilize the method of analysis endorsed in their jurisdiction (whether sentencing ranges or starting point-sentences). As with cases involving an actual offender, courts should fix as narrowly defined a sentence as possible for a reasonably foreseeable offender. A court, however, may find it somewhat more difficult to fix a specific sentence for a reasonably foreseeable offender, given that hypotheticals are advanced without evidence or detailed facts. Accordingly, in fixing the fit sentence for reasonably foreseeable offenders, some latitude may be necessary. But while the court may not be able to necessarily arrive at a single figure, broad statements are not very helpful either. Stating, for instance, that the case law would support a sentence of three to five years does not answer the question of what sentence the offender would otherwise receive and does not assist the analysis. Courts may specify, for instance, that a sentence would be “around” a certain number of months. Fixing a sentence for reasonably foreseeable offenders requires essentially the same approach that judges take in the daily task of sentencing offenders in courtrooms across this country. Any estimate must be circumscribed and tightly defined. 
                         Setting too wide a scope for what would be a fit sentence could skew the analysis and distort the gross disproportionality assessment by unfairly reducing the disparity between the sentence imposed and the mandatory minimum. Indeed, because the purpose of the reasonable hypothetical is to test the limits of the scope of application of a mandatory minimum, the lowest fit sentence that is reasonably foreseeable will figure prominently in the assessment. The large margin of appreciation embedded into the gross disproportionality standard means there is no need to build flexibility into the fit and proportionate sentence. 
                         I will now turn to the second stage of the analysis.
D.           Stage Two: The Gross Disproportionality Standard
                         Once the fit sentence has been determined at the first stage, the inquiry turns into a comparative exercise under which the fit sentence is contrasted with the punishment imposed under the impugned provision. Whether a mandatory minimum sentence is challenged based on its effect on the actual offender or on a reasonably foreseeable offender in a reasonable hypothetical, gross disproportionality is the applicable standard for invalidating it under s. 12 as cruel and unusual punishment (Nur, at paras. 39 and 77; Lloyd, at para. 22; Smith, at p. 1073). 
                         Below, I begin with two preliminary points: first, I explain why O’Ferrall and Wakeling JJ.A. erred in concluding that s. 12 does not apply to imprisonment, and second, I reaffirm that the comparison applies to the sentence imposed, without consideration of parole eligibility. I then turn to how the gross disproportionality assessment should be undertaken, explain why it remains the governing standard under s. 12, and set out the analytical framework to assess whether a mandatory minimum sentence is grossly disproportionate. I canvass the markers of a grossly disproportionate sentence and reinforce how the focus should be on the offence in question, the punishment prescribed, and the effects both have on individuals subject to the prescribed minimum penalty.
(1)           Section 12’s Protection Against Cruel and Unusual Punishment Applies to Cruel and Unusual Periods of Imprisonment
                         Justices O’Ferrall and Wakeling erred in their result and in their reasoning. Wakeling J.A. failed to follow binding authority from this Court on the interpretation of Charter rights, including s. 12. He employed a personal and idiosyncratic approach to sentencing instead of the legal requirements set out in the Criminal Code and in this Court’s authoritative jurisprudence.
                     Specifically, his conclusion that s. 12 is limited to both cruel and unusual punishments and that since imprisonment is not unusual, s. 12 does not protect against excessive terms of imprisonment is simply wrong. The phrase “cruel and unusual” punishment is not that narrow. Rather, it represents a “compendious expression of a norm” that draws on broader fundamental social and moral values (Smith, at pp. 1069 and 1072, per Lamer J., and p. 1088, per McIntyre J., dissenting, quoting Miller v. The Queen, 1976 CanLII 12 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 680, at p. 690). 
                     Imprisonment is the harshest form of punishment in Canada (Gladue, at paras. 36 and 40), and “[a]part from death, imprisonment is the most severe sentence imposed by the law” (Re B.C. Motor Vehicle Act, 1985 CanLII 81 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 486, at p. 532, per Wilson J., concurring). Incarceration entails not only a complete removal of an offender’s liberty, it also has a ripple effect that touches nearly every aspect of the offender’s life and physical and mental health, employability, children, and community (R. Mangat, More Than We Can Afford: The Costs of Mandatory Minimum Sentencing (2014), at pp. 40‑44). 
                     As the purpose of s. 12 is to safeguard human dignity, it protects against grossly disproportionate terms of imprisonment. It ensures that offenders do not suffer completely unwarranted or utterly underserved punishment including grossly disproportionate and abusive periods of incarceration. Given the potentially devastating impacts of incarceration on an offender (Bissonnette, at para. 97), its heavy costs cannot be imposed without limit, scrutiny or justification. There is no reason for this Court to alter course and remove grossly excessive imprisonment from the reach of s. 12. 
(2)           The Comparison Is Based on the Sentence, Without Considering Parole
                     The Crown argued that when assessing the disparity between a fit sentence and a mandatory minimum, a court should factor in the possibility of parole. This Court previously rejected this same argument in Nur, where it held that when comparing a mandatory minimum sentence to the fit sentence, the focus must be on the sentence itself. Accordingly, courts must not consider parole eligibility as a factor reducing the actual impact of the impugned sentence because the possibility of parole cannot cure a grossly disproportionate sentence (Nur, at para. 98). 
                     Factoring in the possibility of parole into the comparison inappropriately tips the scales away from what should be an apples to apples comparison between sentences and introduces unwarranted speculation. Parole is “a statutory privilege rather than a right” that turns on a discretionary decision of the parole board (Nur, at para. 98). Hence, there is “no guarantee that offenders will be granted parole when their ineligibility period expires” (Bissonnette, at para. 41). Parole also “involves a process that is independent of and distinct from the sentencing process” (para. 37). It is the role of the court, not that of the parole board, to ensure that a sentence imposed is not grossly disproportionate. The parole board’s task is to determine whether an offender may safely be released into the community (Nur, at para. 98). 
                     The constitutional obligation to ensure sentences are not grossly disproportionate should not be shifted from the judiciary onto a tribunal that operates in a different legal and constitutional context. Considering parole would require judges to wade into the complexities of the legislation governing parole and consider how to take into account, for example, the reports on how Indigenous and Black offenders are often released later in their sentences and experience lower parole grant rates (Department of Justice, Spotlight on Gladue: Challenges, Experiences, and Possibilities in Canada’s Criminal Justice System (2017), at p. 7; Office of the Correctional Investigator, A Case Study of Diversity in Corrections: The Black Inmate Experience in Federal Penitentiaries (2013), at para. 84). Finally, even if granted, “[t]he idea that parole puts an end to an offender’s sentence is a myth. Conditional release only alters the conditions under which a sentence is served; the sentence itself remains in effect for its entire term” (Bissonnette, at para. 89, citing M. (C.A.), at para. 57). 
(3)      What It Means for a Sentence to Be Grossly Disproportionate
                     For a punishment to offend s. 12, it must first be different from and disproportionate to a fit and proportionate sentence. The first part of the comparative task is to articulate what, if any, differences exist between a fit sentence (identified at stage one) and the mandatory minimum. Following this, courts must gauge the effects of this disparity.  
                     Second, the punishment must be disproportionate in a manner or amount that is grossly so. This requires both the identification of any disparity between the sentences and an assessment of the mandatory minimum’s effect and severity against constitutional standards. 
                     The process of assessing the existence and extent of any disparity between a fit punishment and the mandatory minimum imposed bears a resemblance to what occurs when a sentence is appealed and challenged as being “demonstrably unfit”. In such cases, there is a comparison between what would be fit and what has been imposed. Courts are comfortable with this standard (Parranto, at paras. 30 and 38). Considerations include the gravity of the offence, the moral blameworthiness of the offender, the objectives of sentencing and any aggravating and mitigating circumstances. 
                     However, gross disproportionality is a constitutional standard. In using phrases such as “so excessive as to outrage standards of decency” (Boudreault, at para. 45; Lloyd, at para. 24, citing Morrisey, at para. 26; Wiles, at para. 4, citing Smith, at p. 1072), “abhorrent or intolerable” to society and “shock the conscience” of Canadians (Morrisey, at para. 26; Lloyd, at para. 33; Ferguson, at para. 14), this Court has repeatedly emphasized that gross disproportionality is a high bar (Lloyd, at para. 24; Steele v. Mountain Institution, 1990 CanLII 50 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 1385, at p. 1417).
                     Whether a sentence “outrage[s] standards of decency”, is abhorrent or intolerable, “shock[s] the conscience” or undermines human dignity is a normative question (see Bissonnette, at para. 65). Such a conclusion does not turn on a court’s opinion of whether a majority of Canadians support the penalty. Rather, the views of Canadian society on the appropriate punishment must be assessed through the values and objectives that underlie our sentencing and Charter jurisprudence. 
                     The starting point is that proportionality is a basic tenet of punishment. This means the sentence imposed must bear a direct relationship to the offence committed. As Wilson J. explained:
     . . . it must be a “fit” sentence proportionate to the seriousness of the offence. Only if this is so can the public be satisfied that the offender “deserved” the punishment he received and feel a confidence in the fairness and rationality of the system. 
 
(Re B.C. Motor Vehicle Act, at p. 533)
                     Proportionality is based in fairness and justice for the offender and does not permit unjust punishment for the “sake of the common good” (Priest, at p. 547; see Ipeelee, at para. 37). While society can be understood to be deeply concerned with the criminal behaviour which gave rise to the conviction, people are also committed to fair and just punishments which are not cruel, unusual or grossly disproportionate to the sanction which was deserved. 
                     In addition, the elevated standard of gross disproportionality is intended to reflect a measure of deference to Parliament in crafting sentencing provisions. The word “grossly” signals Parliament is not required to impose perfectly proportionate sentences (Goltz, at p. 501; R. v. Lyons, 1987 CanLII 25 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 309, at pp. 344-45), which would undermine the ability of Parliament to establish norms of punishment, including mandatory minimum sentences (Lloyd, at para. 45). This is because, in respect of mandatory minimums, there is likely to be some disproportion between the individually fit sentence and the uniform mandatory minimum. 
                     In this regard, a sentence may be demonstrably unfit in the sense that an appellate court would intervene, but nevertheless not meet the constitutional threshold of being grossly disproportionate. For example, in R. v. McDonald (1998), 1998 CanLII 13327 (ON CA), 40 O.R. (3d) 641 (C.A.), a 21‑year‑old person with an untreated manic‑depressive disorder pled guilty to using a firearm to commit a robbery and was sentenced to the 4‑year mandatory minimum for that offence. Justice Rosenberg expressed numerous serious concerns about the fitness of the sentence for this offender and opined that on the usual scale of appellate review he would find a sentence of three or four years to be demonstrably unfit. Nevertheless, he concluded at para. 72:
However, that is not the same as gross disproportionality and I am not convinced that having regard to the objective gravity of any offence involving the use of a firearm, even an unloaded one, a sentence approaching four years shocks the conscience.
                     Courts “should be careful not to stigmatize every disproportionate or excessive sentence as being a constitutional violation” as s. 12 is intended to police the “outer limit” of sentencing (Smith, at p. 1072, per Lamer J., and p. 1091, per McIntyre J., dissenting, but not on this point). It is only on “rare and unique occasions” that a sentence will infringe s. 12, as the test is “very properly stringent and demanding” (Steele, at p. 1417; see also Goltz, at p. 502). 
(4)           Gross Disproportionality Is the Governing Standard
                     The gross disproportionality standard has come under criticism from both sides and various sources. Justices O’Ferrall and Wakeling thought that gross disproportionality should not be a measure of cruel and unusual punishment because it is not the “fundamental purpose” of sentencing, which O’Ferrall J.A. believed to be the protection of society and respect for the law (para. 117). Justice Wakeling wrote that proportionality has no relation to s. 12 because the drafters did not expressly include it in the text (paras. 229-30).
                     Others claim the bar is set too high. For example, an intervener argued that there “is no such thing as a ‘merely excessive’ sentence” and that “[a]ny time an offender spends imprisoned that is not fit for their individual circumstance cannot be justified on the grounds that it is ‘merely excessive’” (I.F., British Columbia Civil Liberties Association, at para. 19 (emphasis deleted); see also R. Cairns Way, “A Disappointing Silence: Mandatory Minimums and Substantive Equality” (2015), 18 C.R. (7th) 297).
                     However, in every s. 12 case, this Court has used gross disproportionality as the applicable standard and there is no reason to upset well-settled law. It represents a workable and balanced principle, well‑grounded in human dignity and basic sentencing norms. It also has the benefit of being a balanced standard which recognizes Parliament’s authority to pursue sentencing objectives and options which do not amount to cruel and unusual punishment. In addition, the clarifications in this judgment about what qualifies as gross disproportion will, it is to be hoped, promote certainty and a greater ease of application. In the result, a mandatory term of imprisonment must be grossly disproportionate to what would have otherwise been a fit sentence in order to violate s. 12 (Smith, at pp. 1072-74).
(5)           Whether a Mandatory Minimum Sentence Is Grossly Disproportionate
                     The way courts have historically applied the grossly disproportionate standard to mandatory minimum sentences clarifies which factors or features inform the analysis. This Court has upheld the constitutionality of mandatory minimum sentences in 5 cases: (1) life imprisonment without eligibility for parole for 25 years for first degree murder in Luxton; (2) a mandatory sentence of 7 days of imprisonment and a $300 fine for a first conviction of driving while prohibited in Goltz; (3) a 4-year mandatory minimum sentence for criminal negligence causing death using a firearm in Morrisey; (4) the mandatory minimum sentence for second degree murder of life without possibility for parole for 10 years in Latimer; and (5) a 4‑year mandatory minimum sentence for manslaughter with a firearm in Ferguson.
                     This Court has also struck down mandatory minimum sentences on three occasions — including in two of its most recent cases. In Smith, this Court invalidated a seven‑year mandatory minimum for importation of drugs pursuant to s. 5(2) of the Narcotic Control Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. N-l. In Nur, the three- and five‑year mandatory minimum terms of imprisonment for the possession of a prohibited or restricted firearm when the firearm is loaded or kept with readily accessible ammunition were declared of no force or effect. In Lloyd, the Court invalidated the one-year mandatory minimum sentence for trafficking or possession for the purpose of trafficking of a controlled substance provided by s. 5(3)(a)(i)(D) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, S.C. 1996, c. 19.
                     The ruling and reasoning in these cases provide helpful guidance about when a mandatory minimum is grossly disproportionate. The Court has, in certain cases, articulated various factors which may bear on the assessment, and certain helpful propositions and principles have emerged. For example, in Smith, this Court identified four factors to assess gross disproportionality in the context of a mandatory minimum: the gravity of the offence; the personal characteristics of the offender; the particular circumstances of the case; and the actual effect of the punishment on the offender. Goltz later added other factors. In Nur, this Court established the two‑part test for a s. 12 violation, and while McLachlin C.J. did not explicitly reference the above factors, she did consider the breadth of conduct the mandatory minimum captured; the seriousness of the impugned conduct as compared to the conduct targeted by the mandatory minimum; and whether the punishment is necessary to achieve a valid penal purpose. In Boudreault, which did not deal with a mandatory minimum, but was built on the authorities which did, this Court explained that such factors do not form part of a required or “rigid” test (para. 48; Latimer, at para. 75). Certain factors may highlight important considerations and remain salient. 
                     However, there is merit to regrouping them to simplify the analysis and more directly focus on the three crucial components that must be assessed when considering the validity or vulnerability of mandatory minimum sentences: (1) the scope and reach of the offence; (2) the effects of the penalty on the offender; and (3) the penalty, including the balance struck by its objectives. 
                     These components have particular relevance to mandatory minimums. In selecting mandatory minimums as a sentencing tool, Parliament has decided to make the sentence uniform across a range of circumstances and has chosen to remove the constitutional safety valve of judicial discretion to deal with individual cases. It has defined the offence subject to a particular minimum sentence, and set its nature, gravity, scope and reach. It has determined who will be subject to the mandatory minimum — whether explicitly or implicitly by how the offence is defined or the penalty is imposed. And it has prescribed the penalty or sentence for each mandatory minimum it imposes. 
                     The scope and reach of the offence, the effects of the penalty on the offender, and the penalty are three main components that will have a bearing on the gross disproportionality analysis. In some cases, one alone could lead to a conclusion of gross disproportion. Other times it will be the combination of or interplay between these components which will contribute to a finding of gross disproportion or constitutional compliance. For example, a broad licensing offence with a small penalty may not undermine human dignity as much as a true criminal offence that attaches a significant penalty to less blameworthy conduct.
(a)           The Scope and Reach of the Offence
                     The scope and reach of the offence remains a major feature in the gross disproportionality analysis and it is important to explore the full implications of the impugned offence. The case law reveals that a mandatory minimum sentence is more exposed to challenge where it captures disparate conduct of widely varying gravity and degrees of offender culpability (Lloyd, at para. 24; Smith, at p. 1078). Indeed, mandatory minimum sentences for offences “that can be committed in many ways and under many different circumstances by a wide range of people are constitutionally vulnerable” (Lloyd, at para. 3; see also paras. 24, 27 and 35-36). Thus, the wider the scope of the offence, the more likely there is a circumstance where the mandatory minimum will impose a lengthy term of imprisonment on conduct that involves lesser risk to the public and little moral fault (Nur, at para. 83). In those cases, the sentence is liable to capture conduct that clearly does not merit the mandatory minimum. 
                     In Smith, this Court struck down a seven‑year mandatory minimum for importation of drugs under the Narcotic Control Act because the mandatory sentence applied regardless of the type of substance imported, the quantity imported and whether the purpose was for trafficking or personal use. The offence cast too wide a net and its effects were too broad. It caught the conduct of a hypothetical young person driving back to Canada with their first joint of marijuana: conduct that did not call for the mandatory minimum sentence. 
                     In Nur, the Court invalidated the three‑ and five‑year mandatory minimums for the possession of a prohibited or restricted firearm when the firearm is loaded or kept with readily accessible ammunition because the offence “casts its net over a wide range of potential conduct” (para. 82), including violations that created little risk of harm to the public and were instead little more than licensing infractions (para. 83). The actus reus of the offence involved possession and there was no proof of harm required (para. 84). The offence therefore caught, on the one end, an “outlaw who carries a loaded prohibited or restricted firearm in public places as a tool of his or her criminal trade” and, on the other end, a “licensed and responsible gun owner who stores his unloaded firearm safely with ammunition nearby, but makes a mistake as to where it can be stored” (para. 82). The latter involved little or no moral fault and little or no danger to the public (para. 83). The Court reasoned that “a three-year term of imprisonment for a person who has essentially committed a licensing infraction is totally out of sync with the norms of criminal sentencing” (para. 83). The impugned provision captured too broad a range of criminal behaviour and imposed lengthy terms of incarceration in circumstances where such lengthy prison sentences were not necessary to achieve Parliament’s otherwise valid penal purposes of protecting the public, discouraging other similar conduct or expressing moral condemnation (para. 104). 
                     In Lloyd, the Court used reasonable hypotheticals to explore the actual reach of what appeared to be fairly narrowly drafted prohibitions against trafficking or possession for the purpose of trafficking under s. 5(3)(a)(i)(D) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act. The majority held that the legislation captured a wide breadth of potential conduct, including not only serious drug trafficking but also less blameworthy conduct (para. 27). It treated those who shared smaller amounts of narcotics among friends, spouses or people with substance use disorder as akin to commercial and professional drug dealers. 
                     Thus, a court must assess to what extent the offence’s mens rea and actus reus capture a range of conduct as well as the degree of variation in the offence’s gravity and the offender’s culpability. In characterizing the offence’s scope, a court may consider whether the offence necessarily involves harm to a person or simply the risk of harm, whether there are ways of committing the offence that pose relatively little danger, and to what degree the offence’s mens rea requires an elevated degree of culpability of the offender. In characterizing the breadth of the offence, one must also remember that s. 12 is not so exacting a standard that it requires a sentence to be perfectly tailored to every moral nuance of an offender’s circumstance (Lyons, at pp. 344-45). However, as the Court cautioned in Lloyd, at para. 35: “If Parliament hopes to sustain mandatory minimum penalties for offences that cast a wide net, it should consider narrowing their reach so that they only catch offenders that merit the mandatory minimum sentences.”
                     The nature of the offence, and the severity of the punishment in relation to the impugned offence, may influence the gross disproportionality analysis. In assessing the particular mandatory minimums before the court, the general range of criminal offences will provide necessary context. Minimum sentences can be and have been attached to various types of prohibitions: from licensing offences to true crimes. In the case of regulatory offences or licensing infractions, courts would expect corresponding penalties to be less severe. Conversely, courts may expect harsher punishment to attach to offences that result in serious harm or include a grave mens rea. For example, the provision in the Motor Vehicle Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 288, that was upheld in Goltz required 7 days’ imprisonment and a fine of $300 for those convicted for the first time of driving while being prohibited from doing so. This was a regulatory and preventative provision which sought to ensure people who were prohibited from driving because of their unsafe driving records did not pose a risk of harm to others. The Court upheld the mandatory minimum in Goltz in part because the provision applied to a narrow set of culpable behaviours and the ultimate punishment was “lighter than might first appear” (p. 514). The sentence could be designed to be served in a few weekends or in five days rather than the mandated seven through earned remission (p. 514). In addition, the administrative scheme governing the offence was enacted after extensive study by the Government of British Columbia’s Motor Vehicle Task Force and the scheme specifically targeted drivers who exhibited open contempt of the law (pp. 507 and 511). 
                     When the impugned minimum is attached to a provision that requires a particular act with a defined harm, the court will assess the scope of the provision and the seriousness of that harm in its gross disproportionality analysis. For example, Luxton concerned first degree murder and parole ineligibility. Ferguson dealt with manslaughter in which an RCMP officer shot a detainee. Latimer involved a father killing his child who had cerebral palsy, and Morrisey involved the death of a friend through horseplay with a firearm. The actus reus of these offences involved the death of a person: a specific realized harm, and one of the utmost gravity. This can be expected to carry significant weight in the assessment of gross disproportion. 
                     Courts may also consider sentencing ranges and starting points for such offences, since these tools are useful in assessing proportionality and parity. They reflect judicial consensus on an offence’s gravity, and advance parity by reducing substantial disparities in sentencing (Parranto, at para. 20, citing Lacasse, at para. 2; see also R. v. Stone, 1999 CanLII 688 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 290, at para. 244; Nasogaluak, at para. 44; R. v. Smith, 2019 SKCA 100, 382 C.C.C. (3d) 455, at para. 126). Under s. 12, these tools can assist courts in evaluating a mandatory minimum’s ultimate conformity with sentencing norms to measure whether the mandatory minimum is significantly out of sync with an otherwise fit sentence. Mandatory minimum sentences for similar offences may also assist in this inquiry.
(b)          The Effects of the Penalty on the Offender
                     The severity of the mandatory minimum sentence’s effects on the people subject to it must be taken into account when assessing the degree to which the sentence is disproportionate. In measuring the overall impact of the punishment on the actual or reasonably foreseeable offender, courts must aim to identify the precise harm associated with the punishment. This calls for an inquiry into the effects that the impugned punishment may have on the actual or reasonably foreseeable offender both generally and based on their specific characteristics and qualities. This component is central to the underlying purpose of s. 12. If the effect of a mandatory punishment is to inflict mental pain and suffering on an offender such that the offender’s dignity is undermined, the penalty cannot stand (9147‑0732 Québec inc., at para. 51).
                     A court should certainly consider the additional period of imprisonment imposed by the mandatory minimum. Given the profound impact of imprisonment, the level and length of the sentence is of great personal and societal import. Hence, when quantitatively comparing the proportionate term of imprisonment to that which is mandated by the mandatory minimum sentence provision, it is important to keep in mind that the assessment is not merely some abstract mathematical calculation, but involves precious time that an offender may be unwarrantedly (and possibly unconstitutionally) spending in prison.
                     Courts should consider the effect of a sentence on the particular offender. The principle of proportionality implies that where the impact of imprisonment is greater on a particular offender, a reduction in sentence may be appropriate (Suter, at para. 48; B. L. Berger, “Proportionality and the Experience of Punishment”, in D. Cole and J. Roberts, eds., Sentencing in Canada: Essays in Law, Policy, and Practice (2020), 368, at p. 368). For this reason, courts have reduced sentences to reflect the comparatively harsher experience of imprisonment for certain offenders, like offenders in law enforcement, for those suffering disabilities (R. v. Salehi, 2022 BCCA 1, at paras. 66-71 (CanLII); R. v. Nuttall, 2001 ABCA 277, 293 A.R. 364, at paras. 8-9; R. v. A.R. (1994), 1994 CanLII 4524 (MB CA), 92 Man. R. (2d) 183 (C.A.); R. v. Adamo, 2013 MBQB 225, 296 Man. R. (2d) 245, at para. 65; R. v. Wallace (1973), 1973 CanLII 1434 (ON CA), 11 C.C.C. (2d) 95 (Ont. C.A.), at p. 100), or for those whose experience of prison is harsher due to systemic racism (R. v. A.F. (1997), 1997 CanLII 14505 (ON CA), 101 O.A.C. 146, at para. 17; R. v. Batisse, 2009 ONCA 114, 93 O.R. (3d) 643, at para. 37; R. v. Marfo, 2020 ONSC 5663, at para. 52 (CanLII)). To ensure that the severity of a mandatory minimum sentence is appropriately characterized under s. 12, it is necessary to consider the impact of incarceration in light of these individualized considerations (L. Kerr and B. L. Berger, “Methods and Severity: The Two Tracks of Section 12” (2020), 94 S.C.L.R. (2d) 235, at pp. 238 and 244‑45).
                     The effects of a sentence are not measured in numbers alone. They are “often a composite of many factors” and include the sentence’s “nature and the conditions under which it is applied” (Smith, at p. 1073). Thus, as Lamer J. observed, a sentence of “twenty years for a first offence against property would be grossly disproportionate, but so would three months of imprisonment if the prison authorities decide it should be served in solitary confinement” (p. 1073). When presented with a sufficient evidentiary record, courts should consider how the conditions of confinement — for example, the difference between the supports available while serving a non‑custodial conditional sentence versus serving a custodial sentence in a federal institution — would affect an individual offender. Trial courts have increasingly been of this view (see Adamo, at paras. 55 and 65; L. Kerr, “Sentencing Ashley Smith: How Prison Conditions Relate to the Aims of Punishment” (2017), 32 C.J.L.S. 187, at p. 201). 
                     In addition, this Court has repeatedly referred to longstanding doubts about whether mandatory minimum sentences, or incarceration writ large, are effective tools of deterrence (Nur, at paras. 113-14; Bissonnette, at para. 47; R. v. Proulx, 2000 SCC 5, 1 S.C.R. 61, at para. 107; see also Canadian Sentencing Commission, Sentencing Reform: A Canadian Approach (1987), at pp. 136-37). Though the certainty of criminal punishment may produce certain deterrent effects, empirical evidence indicates that mandatory minimum sentences do not deter crime any more than a less harsh, proportionate sentence would (Nur, at para. 114). 
(c)           The Penalty and its Objectives 
                     In relation to the penalty imposed under the mandatory minimum, Parliament sets the length of the minimum sentence based on its sentencing objectives. In turn, when assessing gross disproportion, courts assess the severity of the punishment mandated by Parliament to determine whether and to what extent the minimum sentence goes beyond what is necessary to achieve Parliament’s sentencing objectives relevant to the offence while “having regard to the legitimate purposes of punishment and the adequacy of possible alternatives” (Smith, at pp. 1099‑1100). 
                     Denunciation and deterrence, both general and specific, are valid sentencing principles (Bissonnette, at paras. 46-47 and 49-50). Denunciatory sentences express a “collective statement that the offender’s conduct should be punished for encroaching on our society’s basic code of values” (M. (C.A.), at para. 81), and the need for denunciation is closely tied to the gravity of the offence (Ipeelee, at para. 37). Where the consequences of the offence clearly offend Canadians’ “basic code of values” and call for a strong condemnation, this Court has afforded Parliament greater deference in enacting a mandatory minimum (Morrisey, at para. 47). Likewise, general deterrence can support a stiffer sentence within a range of sentences that are short of “cruel and unusual” punishment (Morrisey, at para. 45; Nur, at para. 45). General deterrence cannot, however, justify a mandatory minimum alone: no person can be made to suffer a sentence that is grossly disproportionate to what they deserve in order to deter others (Nur, at para. 45; Bissonnette, at para. 51). As Lamer J. wrote in Smith, it may be unnecessary to punish the “small” offender in order to deter the “serious offender” (p. 1080).
                     Deference to Parliament’s decision to impose denunciatory sentences cannot be unlimited, as this purpose could support sentences of unlimited length (Bissonnette, at para. 46, citing Ruby, at §1.22). In enacting mandatory minimums, Parliament can prioritize some sentencing objectives over others, but within certain limits (Lloyd, at para. 45; Morrisey, at paras. 45-46). No single sentencing objective should be applied to the exclusion of all others (Nasogaluak, at para. 43). Each sentencing objective remains relevant to crafting a sentence that respects human dignity. Given the purpose of s. 12, the role given to rehabilitation in the mandatory minimum under consideration will help determine if the provision amounts to cruel and unusual punishment. 
                     While rehabilitation has no standalone constitutional status, the strong connection between the objective of rehabilitation and human dignity was explained in Bissonnette (para. 83; Safarzadeh‑Markhali, at para. 71). The comments made in relation to offences which may be cruel and unusual by their nature also apply to mandatory minimums under this first prong of s. 12. Rehabilitation “reflects the conviction that all individuals carry within themselves the capacity to reform and re‑enter society” (Bissonnette, at para. 83; see Lacasse, at para. 4). The Court found that a punishment that completely disregards rehabilitation would disrespect and be incompatible with human dignity and would therefore constitute cruel and unusual punishment under s. 12 (Bissonnette, at para. 85). Justice Gonthier’s statement at para. 45 in Morrisey, that s. 12 is not violated due to the “presence or absence of any one sentencing principle”, needs to be read in light of this Court’s conclusion that “[t]o ensure respect for human dignity, Parliament must leave a door open for rehabilitation, even in cases where this objective is of minimal importance” (Bissonnette, at para. 85). 
                     The objective is not to have rehabilitation prevail over other sentencing objectives but rather to ensure it remains a component “in a penal system based on respect for the inherent dignity of every individual” (Bissonnette, at para. 88). It follows then, that in order to be compatible with human dignity, and therefore respect s. 12, punishment or sentencing must take rehabilitation into account. As noted by one intervener: “A person who has been found guilty of a crime is not simply a canvas on which to paint society’s condemnation, but remains a human being and a rights-holder endowed with human dignity and legal rights” (see I.F., Canadian Civil Liberties Association, at para. 25). The application of any mandatory minimum sentence that has the effect of excluding or completely disregarding rehabilitation will be grossly disproportionate as it is incompatible with human dignity.
                     Courts should assess whether the length of imprisonment legislated is too excessive in light of other potentially adequate alternatives. For example, if Parliament mandates a lengthy term of imprisonment when a conditional discharge would meet Parliament’s sentencing objectives or if Parliament mandates incarceration when a fine would constitute an adequate penalty. There is no mathematical formula to determine the specific number of years that would make a sentence in excess of a legitimate penal aim. The analysis, in all cases, must be contextual and there is no hard number above or below which a sentence becomes grossly disproportionate. 
                     A mandatory minimum sentence, however, will be constitutionally suspect and require careful scrutiny when it provides no discretion to impose a sentence other than imprisonment in circumstances where there should not be imprisonment, given the gravity of the offence and the offender’s culpability. That said, a minimum sentence can be grossly disproportionate where a fit and proportionate sentence would include a lengthy term of imprisonment. A mandatory minimum that adds to an offender’s prison sentence may have a significant effect, given the profound consequences of incarceration on an offender’s life and liberty. A mandatory minimum sentence that has such an effect cannot be categorically excluded from scrutiny under the s. 12 analysis, as O’Ferrall and Wakeling JJ.A. suggest. Even if, in these cases, constitutional considerations are not between different types of sentences, mandatory minimum sentences still require the nuance of considering the extent of the periods of incarceration.
                     Courts should evaluate the punishment in light of the principles of parity and proportionality. As an expression of proportionality, parity assists courts in fixing a proportionate sentence (R. v. Friesen, 2020 SCC 9, 1 S.C.R. 424, at paras. 32‑33). Where a mandatory minimum imposes a relatively shorter term of imprisonment, the mandatory minimum will still be grossly disproportionate if it represents an intolerable departure from the proportionate sentence. This would correspond to circumstances where even the smallest difference between the proportionate sentence and the mandatory minimum would outrage standards of decency and shock the conscience of Canadians.
                     What number Parliament sets as the mandatory minimum is also of significance. There will be some sentences where the length alone can establish gross disproportionality. For example, in Smith, Lamer J. observed that a sentence of “twenty years for a first offence against property would be grossly disproportionate”. When the sentence is dramatically higher than what the range of sentences would otherwise be without the mandatory minimum, the provision risks imposing a large penalty on a range of conduct that may not merit it. Further, if the mandatory minimum is set at the top of the range for that offence, there is increased risk that it will impose a disproportionate penalty on those who commit the less serious forms of that offence. 
(6)           Conclusion
                     The case law offers helpful guidance on factors that have informed the gross disproportionality assessment. However, courts need not adhere to a rigid test or fixed set of factors to determine whether a state‑sanctioned punishment constitutes a grossly disproportionate one. Instead, judges should focus on three essential components when evaluating the constitutionality of mandatory minimum sentences: the scope and reach of the offence, the effects of the penalty on the offender, and the penalty. The first inquiry will often centre on the scope of the offence and whether it captures a broad set of disparate conduct. An inquiry into the effects of the punishment on the individual or reasonably foreseeable offender lies at the heart of the gross disproportionality analysis. Courts should inquire into the actual effects the punishment may have on the offender: both the time period and the material conditions under which the sentence will be served. The interplay between each of the three components should drive courts’ gross disproportionality analysis.
                     An inquiry into the sentence will often focus on whether the penalty at issue is excessive in relation to Parliament’s legitimate sentencing objectives. This will often require an analysis of the primary sentencing principles animating the mandatory penalty to ensure no individual sentencing objectives are being applied to the exclusion of all others. Judges should remain aware of potentially adequate alternatives to the impugned punishment. Having set out the framework for gross disproportionality, I turn now to Mr. Hills’ challenge to the mandatory minimum in s. 244.2(3)(b). It is also important to determine the circumstances of the offence in issue.
E.            Section 244.2(3)(b) Is Grossly Disproportionate 
                     Mr. Hills fired several rounds from a hunting rifle into a residential home, knowing that or being reckless as to whether it was occupied. Mr. Hills concedes the four‑year mandatory minimum sentence under s. 244.2(3)(b) is not grossly disproportionate in his circumstances.
                     Instead, he says the minimum would be grossly disproportionate in a hypothetical scenario where a young person intentionally discharges an air‑powered pistol or rifle at a residence that is incapable of perforating the residence’s walls (see Court of Queen’s Bench decision, at para. 14). As I explain below, the scenario raised by Mr. Hills is reasonably foreseeable. Moreover, I agree with the sentencing judge that four years of imprisonment would be grossly disproportionate in this scenario. In my view, Antonio J.A. erred in overstating the gravity of the offence and the culpability of the offender involved in this realistic scenario.
(1)           Mr. Hills Raises a Reasonably Foreseeable Scenario
                     The Crown rightly conceded and the sentencing judge properly accepted that Mr. Hills advanced a reasonably foreseeable scenario. To begin, the scenario proposed by Mr. Hills falls within the scope of the offence and does not stretch or strain its constituent elements. The actus reus of the offence requires an offender to discharge a “firearm” into or at a “place”, which means “any building or structure”. There is no question that a residence constitutes a place. The sole question is whether an air‑powered rifle or pistol could constitute a “firearm” per s. 2 of the Criminal Code, despite being incapable of perforating a residential wall. The expert evidence called by Mr. Hills resolved any doubt on this issue and cured the “evidentiary gap” which previously led some courts to decline to consider a similar scenario (see R. v. Oud, 2016 BCCA 332, 339 C.C.C. (3d) 379, at para. 46). 
                     Specifically, the expert showed that eight air-powered rifles or pistols discharged a projectile with sufficient velocity to satisfy the “pig’s eye test” but most of them were incapable of penetrating a residential wall. Those eight devices were (1) an airsoft pistol, (2) a Daisy Red Ryder model BB gun, (3) a paintball marker, (4) a youth sized pellet rifle, (5) an adult sized .177 calibre pellet rifle, (6) a .22 calibre pellet pistol, (7) a .22 calibre pellet rifle, and (8) a Ruger 10/22 semi-automatic rifle. The expert concluded that there are “numerous air‑powered rifles and pistols commonly available in Canada which meet the Criminal Code definition of a firearm, but are not capable of perforating a typical residential framed wall assembly” (A.R., at p. 393; see also Court of Queen’s Bench decision, at para. 16).
                     The Crown accepted the expert’s conclusion that some air-powered devices are firearms under s. 2 of the Criminal Code, yet are incapable of perforating a typical residential wall. I have no concern regarding the expert’s conclusion either. 
                     It is also reasonably foreseeable to imagine a young person firing a BB gun or a paintball gun at a house. As the sentencing judge wrote, it is “easy to conceive of situations where a young person might do just as posed in the hypothetical case” (para. 17). The offender could do so as part of a game, to pass time, or for a bit of mischief. Thus, it is reasonably foreseeable that (1) a young person intentionally discharges a “firearm” into or at a residence, (2) knowing that or being reckless as to whether a person is present, and that (3) the “firearm” discharged is an air-powered pistol or rifle that is classified as a “firearm” under s. 2 of the Criminal Code but is incapable of perforating a typical residential wall. 
(2)           A Fit and Proportionate Sentence in a Foreseeable Scenario Would Not Involve Imprisonment
                     I turn to the first stage of the s. 12 inquiry in Nur and the question of a fit sentence for the reasonably foreseeable offender in such a situation. The usual deferential appellate standard of review for sentencing applies to a sentence imposed on the actual offender (Lacasse, at paras. 11-12). For sentences imposed on hypothetical offenders, however, the same rationale for deference carries less weight as the fit sentence is determined by supposing facts, and not through weighing actual evidence (Housen v. Nikolaisen, 2002 SCC 33, 2 S.C.R. 235, at paras. 18 and 74). 
                     However, there is no need to set out when a reviewing court may come to its own conclusion about a fit sentence for reasonably foreseeable offenders, since I agree with the sentencing judge that a fit sentence for this hypothetical youthful offender would involve probation and that “certainly no such offender would receive a four-year penitentiary term or a sentence approaching anywhere near that” (para. 19). Indeed, in light of the gravity of the act and the moral culpability of the offender in such an instance, the scenario is akin to a minor mischief offence where a suspended sentence or probation may be appropriate. The gravity of the offence and the culpability of the offender are low in this scenario, focusing on the offence’s consequences and the offender’s mens rea. Regarding the offence’s gravity, the consequences for public safety are relatively low in this scenario. The actus reus for this offence does not require any person to be present at the “place” where the firearm is discharged. Even if another person were present, the expert evidence establishes the minimal danger posed by the offender’s actions, given the firearm’s power is substantially reduced. In my view, Antonio J.A. erred in overstating the risks to the public in this scenario as a result. 
                     I do not accept that the sentencing judge overlooked the risk of a projectile flying through an open window or striking a person walking nearby. A conviction does not require anyone to be where the projectile is shot and the sentencing judge was clearly alive to these risks, observing “the gravamen of the offence is the danger of potential harm, which can be caused by wildly shooting into or at a place. The danger should not depend on whether a person is shooting into a building, through a window or at a motor vehicle. The danger is always present” (para. 41 (emphasis deleted)). The sentencing judge was evidently aware of the very risks that Antonio J.A. suggests were overlooked.
                     In my view, the sentencing judge concluded the firearms at issue posed a far lower risk relative to conventional firearms, even taking into account the risks raised by Antonio J.A. The sentencing judge found the expert “cured” the “evidentiary gap” in Oud (para. 26). Part of the “gap” in Oud was the lack of evidence to show whether a projectile fired from an air-powered rifle or pistol was “far less serious than discharging a regular gun” (Oud, at para. 47). 
                     Here, the expert evidence showed an air-powered device could be far less dangerous, with some incapable of causing damage beyond cracking the vinyl siding of a house. Moreover, some of the devices that the expert tested were, quite literally, designed to shoot projectiles at other people for sport. When these considerations are combined with the fact that no one needs to be near where the projectile is shot, I see no issue with the sentencing judge’s conclusion that the risk to life and safety is low in Mr. Hills’ hypothetical (para. 16). I fail to see any substantial harm, whether actual or potential, from an offender firing a paintball gun at a house when nobody is around, even though this conduct falls within the impugned section.
                     Turning to the offender’s culpability, the Crown argues that the double mens rea tailors this offence to capture particularly blameworthy conduct. In my view, the double mens rea requirement does little to narrow the offence. To be convicted, an offender need only know of or be reckless as to the presence of others. No harm to others is required to ground the offence. Although recklessness requires the “knowledge of a danger or risk and persistence in a course of conduct which creates a risk that the prohibited result will occur” (Sansregret v. The Queen, 1985 CanLII 79 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 570, at p. 584), the offender must only be thoughtless as to whether anyone is present at the place where the firearm — including a paintball gun, airsoft gun, or BB gun — is discharged. Recklessness as conceived in s. 244.2(1)(a) does not require an offender to explicitly turn their mind to the fact that they are placing others at risk. I agree with the sentencing judge that the scenario discloses immature behaviour and low moral blameworthiness (paras. 17 and 19). 
                     Youth is a mitigating factor on sentencing. The hypothetical scenario is an example of criminalized conduct that may reflect a lack of guidance or supervision more than criminal intent on the part of the offender. In the context of youthful offenders, the principles of general deterrence and denunciation should come secondary to that of rehabilitation (R. v. Nassri, 2015 ONCA 316, 125 O.R. (3d) 578, at para. 31). In this scenario, general deterrence should play a limited role in crafting a fit sentence (Ruby, at §1.36; R. v. Mohenu, 2019 ONCA 291, at paras. 12-13 (CanLII)). Instead, specific deterrence and rehabilitation should be the primary objectives when sentencing youthful first offenders (Priest, at pp. 543-44; R. v. Tan, 2008 ONCA 574, 268 O.A.C. 385, at para. 32; R. v. T. (K.), 2008 ONCA 91, 89 O.R. (3d) 99, at paras. 41-42).
                     As such, because the gravity of the offence and the culpability of the offender in this scenario are low, and the youthfulness of the offender acts as a mitigating factor, the fit and proportionate sentence is a suspended sentence of up to 12 months’ probation. 
(3)           The Mandatory Minimum Is Grossly Disproportionate
                     I turn now to stage two of the Nur analysis and consider whether the mandatory minimum at issue requires the court to impose a sentence that is grossly disproportionate to the fit sentence. Based on this reasonable hypothetical, I conclude that the four‑year mandatory minimum term of imprisonment imposed by s. 244.2(3)(b) is grossly disproportionate. It would “shock the conscience” of Canadians to learn that an offender can receive four years of imprisonment for an activity that poses more or less the same risk to the public as throwing a stone through the window of a residential home. 
                     The first component is the offence. Like in Nur and Lloyd, the mandatory minimum sentence in this case applies to a wide spectrum of conduct. On one end of the spectrum, there is Mr. Hills’ conduct, which poses a high risk of harm and demonstrates an elevated degree of culpability. On the other, there is the foreseeable scenario raised by Mr. Hills, which presents little danger to the public and little fault. The wide scope of the minimum is due mainly to the actus reus for s. 244.2(1)(a). As noted, the definition of “firearm” encompasses devices capable of inflicting lethal harm as well as those designed to shoot projectiles at other people in recreational sport. The definition of “place” includes everything from a garden shed to a car, occupied or not. No person need be in the area where the firearm is shot. While I agree that firing a hunting rifle at a house is very severe and blameworthy conduct (as in Mr. Hills’ case), the same cannot be said for the hypothetical scenario presented here. In the result, s. 244.2(1)(a) is at greater risk of being constitutionally infirm because it captures a broad range of disparate conduct that includes offences of varying gravity and degrees of offender culpability. The scope of the offence is wide.
                     The second component is the effects of the punishment on the actual or reasonably foreseeable offender. A four-year term of imprisonment would have significant deleterious effects on youthful offenders, who are viewed by our criminal law as having high rehabilitative prospects. It follows that sentences for youthful offenders are often largely directed at rehabilitation. To prioritize rehabilitation, youthful offenders should benefit from the shortest possible sentence that is proportionate to the gravity of the offence (see R. v. Brown, 2015 ONCA 361, 126 O.R. (3d) 797, at para. 7; R. v. Laine, 2015 ONCA 519, 338 O.A.C. 264, at para. 85). This is because incarceration is often not a setting where the reformative needs of young people are met (Ruby, at §5.191). Youthful offenders in federal penitentiaries are often bullied, recruited into adult gangs for protection and are vulnerable to placements in segregation (Office of the Correctional Investigator and Office of the Provincial Advocate for Children and Youth, Missed Opportunities: The Experience of Young Adults Incarcerated in Federal Penitentiaries (2017)). For the youthful offender at bar, the difference between a reformatory sentence served in community and a four‑year period of incarceration would be profoundly detrimental. 
                     The mandatory minimum’s effect is extremely severe in this case. Like the minimums at issue in Nur and Lloyd, its effect is to replace a probationary sentence with four years of imprisonment. Not only does the minimum mandate the punishment of “last resort”, it imposes four years of incarceration. This weighs strongly against the minimum’s constitutionality under s. 12. 
                     The third component is the penalty. A four-year custodial sentence is so excessive as to be significantly out of sync with sentencing norms and goes far beyond what is necessary for Parliament to achieve its sentencing goals for this offence. A four‑year minimum term of imprisonment for a youthful offender shooting a BB gun at a residence is draconian. It is a sentence that far exceeds what is necessary to protect the public, condemn the offender’s behaviour or discourage others from engaging in similar conduct. The need for denunciation is closely tied to the gravity of the offence (Ipeelee, at para. 37). Here, the offence’s gravity is low and it is unreasonable to suggest an offender’s conduct in this scenario greatly offends any basic moral values. General deterrence cannot support the minimum in this case either, since “a person cannot be made to suffer a grossly disproportionate punishment simply to send a message to discourage others from offending” (Nur, at para. 45). While this Court has generally noted the importance of denunciation and deterrence in firearms offences (Morrisey, at para. 46), this does not imply that these aims can be emphasized in cases involving firearms, particularly given the wide definition of firearms and where the offence poses little or no danger (as Nur itself illustrates, at paras. 82-84). Nor does the minimum show any respect for the principles of parity and proportionality. A four-year sentence for what is, at most, a minor form of mischief is totally out of sync with sentencing norms. Unlike the mandatory minimum sentences in Hilbach (see paras. 72-73 and 95), there is no justification for emphasizing denunciation and deterrence to a great extent in this scenario.
                     A comparison between punishments imposed for other crimes of similar gravity and the mandatory minimum set in this case reveals great disproportion. Consider, for example, R. v. Pretty, 2005 BCCA 52, 208 B.C.A.C. 79, R. v. Schnare, N.S.J. No. 118 (QL), 1988 CarswellNS 568 (WL) (C.A.), and R. v. Cheung, Gee and Gee (1977), 5 A.R. 356 (S.C. (Trial Div.)), where in each case firing a pellet gun at a property was charged as a mischief offence and the offender received a sentence far below the mandatory minimum sentence mandated under s. 244.2(3)(b) (suspended sentence in Pretty; two months of incarceration, two years of probation and restitution in Schnare; and a suspended sentence and restitution in Cheung). The appellant in Pretty was a youthful offender who held animosity towards his neighbour and fired a BB gun at his neighbour’s home. The sentencing judge suspended the passing of sentence and placed the offender on probation for 12 months. The British Columbia Court of Appeal dismissed the sentence appeal. In Schnare, the appellant was a young man who went on a shooting spree with a pellet gun and caused damage to several houses and moving vehicles. He was sentenced to two months of incarceration, two years of probation and several thousand dollars in restitution. The Nova Scotia Court of Appeal upheld his sentence. Finally, the three young defendants in Cheung were involved in the firing of a pellet gun at a business and nearby vehicles. Each received a 12-month suspended sentence and a restitution order. These comparable cases lead me to the same conclusion as the sentencing judge — a suspended sentence with up to 12 months’ probation would be a fit sentence for the hypothetical offender (Court of Queen’s Bench decision, at para. 19). A four‑year mandatory minimum would be a grossly disproportionate punishment considering the nature of the offence committed by the reasonably foreseeable offender as compared to other crimes of similar gravity. 
                     For the above reasons, I find that s. 244.2(3)(b) is grossly disproportionate. It applies to an offence that captures a wide spectrum of conduct, ranging from acts that present little danger to the public to those that pose a grave risk. Its effect at the low end of the spectrum is as severe as the minimums in Nur and Lloyd. Denunciation and deterrence alone cannot support such a result. The punishment shows a complete disregard for sentencing norms and the mandatory prison term would have significant deleterious effects on a youthful offender. In light of these considerations, I agree with Mr. Hills that it would outrage Canadians to learn that an offender can receive four years of imprisonment for firing a paintball gun at a home.
                     As the Crown does not advance any argument or evidence to demonstrate that this is one of the rare cases in which cruel and unusual punishment under s. 12 may be justified under s. 1 of the Charter, I need not address this issue.
F.             Did the Court of Appeal of Alberta Err in Failing to Consider Mr. Hills’ Gladue Report and his Métis Status in Re-Sentencing Him?
                     Mr. Hills argues that the Court of Appeal failed to consider his Gladue report and his Métis status in re-sentencing him. He is asking this Court to reinstate the three‑and‑a‑half‑year sentence imposed by the sentencing judge.
                     As I conclude that the sentencing judge did not err in finding that s. 244.2(3)(b) was unconstitutional, I see no basis to interfere with the sentence imposed on Mr. Hills by the sentencing judge. The parties do not argue the sentencing judge’s sentence is demonstrably unfit, nor that he made any other error in principle which impacts the sentence. Moreover, sentencing decisions are entitled to a high level of deference on appeal (Lacasse, at paras. 11 and 67). As the Court of Appeal interfered with the sentencing judge’s sentence after having found that s. 244.2(3)(b) was constitutional, it is therefore unnecessary to address this part of its reasons. 
                     In conclusion, the sentencing judge’s sentence is reinstated and it is unnecessary to consider whether the Court of Appeal erred in failing to assess Mr. Hills’ Gladue report and his Métis status.
G.           Remedy
                     Having concluded that s. 244.2(3)(b) infringes s. 12 and the infringement is not justified under s. 1 of the Charter, the mandatory minimum set out in this provision is immediately declared of no force or effect under s. 52(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982. The parties made no submissions on alternative remedies under the Charter when a breach of s. 12 occurs, such as those considered in Boudreault (at para. 103) and Bissonnette (at paras. 135‑36).
VI.         Conclusion
                     For these reasons, I would allow the appeal. The judgment of the Alberta Court of Appeal is set aside. The mandatory minimum set out in s. 244.2(3)(b) of the Criminal Code is grossly disproportionate. It infringes s. 12 of the Charter and is not saved by s. 1. It is immediately declared of no force or effect pursuant to s. 52(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982, and the declaration applies retroactively. The three‑and‑a‑half‑year sentence imposed on Mr. Hills by the sentencing judge is reinstated. 
                   The following are the reasons delivered by
 
                    Côté J. — 
I.               Introduction
                    I agree with my colleague Martin J.’s affirmation of the two‑stage framework for determining whether a mandatory minimum sentence violates s. 12 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. However, I respectfully disagree with her attempt to clarify the established framework through a new three‑part test for gross disproportionality. I further disagree with her interpretation of s. 244.2(1)(a) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C‑46, and her application of it to the hypothetical scenario posed by Mr. Hills at trial. In my view, the four‑year mandatory minimum formerly imposed by s. 244.2(3)(b) of the Criminal Code does not violate s. 12.
II.            Legal Framework
                    The two‑stage inquiry for determining whether a mandatory minimum sentence violates s. 12 of the Charter is well‑established. It was affirmed eight months ago by a unanimous Court in R. v. Bissonnette, 2022 SCC 23. First, the court must determine “what constitutes a proportionate sentence for the offence having regard to the objectives and principles of sentencing in the Criminal Code” (Bissonnette, at para. 63, quoting R. v. Nur, 2015 SCC 15, 1 S.C.R. 773, at para. 46). Second, the court must ask whether the mandatory minimum requires the judge to impose a sentence that is “grossly disproportionate” to the sentence that would be fit and proportionate, either for the actual offender or for another offender in a reasonable hypothetical case (Bissonnette, at para. 63; Nur, at para. 46; R. v. Lloyd, 2016 SCC 13, 1 S.C.R. 130, at para. 23).
                    In these companion appeals, my colleague endorses this two‑stage “Nur” framework (Martin J.’s reasons, at paras. 3 and 40; R. v. Hilbach, 2023 SCC 3, at para. 34). But in seeking to provide “further guidance, direction and clarity” (Martin J.’s reasons, at para. 3), she has, in my respectful view, introduced regrettable uncertainty and confusion. At stage two of the Nur framework, my colleague sets out three “components that must be assessed”: (1) the scope and reach of the offence; (2) the effects of the punishment on the offender; and (3) the “penalty” and its objectives (para. 122). Each of these considerations is relevant to determining a fit and proportionate sentence at stage one of the Nur framework. They do not tell us whether the statutorily‑imposed minimum sentence is “grossly disproportionate”, beyond merely excessive, in comparison to the length of what would be a fit and proportionate sentence for the offence.
                    First, if the “scope and reach of the offence” is broad, there will be a wider range of fit sentences. At issue, for constitutional purposes, is the lowest fit sentence for conduct which could reasonably be expected to fall under the impugned minimum. Indeed, in this case, the “wide spectrum of conduct” captured under my colleague’s interpretation of s. 244.2(1)(a) leads to her conclusion that a non‑carceral sentence would be fit and proportionate for the hypothetical offender raised by Mr. Hills at trial (paras. 5, 164 and 169). But this is irrelevant to the subsequent determination, at stage two of the Nur framework, of whether four years is beyond merely excessive but “grossly disproportionate” in relation to that specific sentence. The “scope and reach of the offence” simply establishes the low end of the range of fit and proportionate sentences for a particular offence.
                    Second, my colleague focuses on the effects of incarceration. Again, with respect, this is confusing for two reasons. The first is that these effects — and the objective of rehabilitation — are directly relevant to determining a fit and proportionate sentence at stage one of the Nur framework. Indeed, as my colleague states, “[c]ourts should consider the effect of a sentence on the particular offender . . . where the impact of imprisonment is greater on a particular offender, a reduction in sentence may be appropriate” (Martin J.’s reasons, at para. 135 (underlining added)). This is simply stage one of the established framework. The second reason is that the effects of incarceration are considered not in isolation but in relation to a particular offence (see Bissonnette, at para. 49). That a “four‑year term of imprisonment would have significant deleterious effects on youthful offenders” (Martin J.’s reasons, at para. 165) is not disputed. But this may be equally true for those who commit murder or other more serious offences. We are willing to tolerate longer punitive sentences — despite what may be similarly devastating effects of imprisonment — for those who commit more severe crimes. As my colleague notes, “[t]o prioritize rehabilitation, youthful offenders should benefit from the shortest possible sentence that is proportionate to the gravity of the offence” (para. 165 (emphasis added)).
                    Third, my colleague focuses on the “penalty” and its objectives. I agree that courts should always consider the interplay between deterrence and denunciation and other sentencing objectives. But this third “component” is the crux of the entire inquiry — to determine whether Parliament exceeded constitutional bounds in punishing certain offenders. In her analysis, my colleague largely returns to the same principles of sentencing that are directly relevant to determining the fit and proportionate sentence at stage one of the Nur framework, including the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender (see para. 167). At the second stage, her conclusion still turns on whether the difference in length between the four‑year minimum and the lower “fit” sentence would “outrage Canadians” (para. 169).
                    As such, and while I appreciate the difficulty in deciding whether a minimum sentence rises to the level of being grossly disproportionate, my colleague’s new three‑part approach does not assist in this determination. It simply duplicates considerations relevant to determining the low end of the range of fit and proportionate sentences at stage one of the Nur framework. At the second stage, whether a minimum sentence is grossly disproportionate to the fit sentence — i.e., whether it is a sentence that is beyond merely excessive but “so excessive as to outrage standards of decency” (R. v. Smith, 1987 CanLII 64 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 1045, at p. 1072, citing Miller v. The Queen, 1976 CanLII 12 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 680, at p. 688, per Laskin C.J.; Lloyd, at para. 24); would “shock the conscience” of Canadians (Lloyd, at para. 33); be “abhorrent or intolerable” to society (R. v. Boudreault, 2018 SCC 58, 3 S.C.R. 599, at para. 126, citing Lloyd, at para. 24; Smith, at p. 1072; R. v. Morrisey, 2000 SCC 39, 2 S.C.R. 90, at para. 26); or be “incompatible with human dignity” (Bissonnette, at para. 60) — remains a normative judgment (Martin J.’s reasons, at para. 110).
                    This is exemplified in the companion appeal. Notwithstanding her new three‑part test, Martin J.’s ultimate conclusions in Hilbach turn on whether the five‑ and four‑year minimums for robbery with a restricted or prohibited firearm or with an ordinary firearm, respectively, would “shoc[k] the conscience” or be “so excessive as to outrage standards of decency” in comparison to the fit sentence of two to three years (Hilbach, at paras. 81 and 108). In contrast, Justices Karakatsanis and Jamal view the same gap differently. They find that it is “hard to fathom how a sentence nearly double the amount of a proportionate sentence would not shock the conscience of Canadians” (Hilbach, at para. 145; see also paras. 118 and 161). On both sides, this is a matter of judgment as to when an additional period of imprisonment becomes so excessive that it constitutes cruel and unusual punishment.
                    I do not dispute that a four‑year sentence would be grossly disproportionate in relation to a non‑carceral sentence. I simply disagree that probation would ever be a proportionate sentence in a reasonably foreseeable application of s. 244.2(1)(a). Properly interpreted, and for the reasons below, s. 244.2(1)(a) does not capture conduct which involves “little danger to the public” or “little moral fault” (Martin J.’s reasons, at paras. 5, 125, 164 and 169; Nur, at para. 83). Rather, intentionally shooting a life‑threatening firearm into or at a building or other place, knowing of or being reckless as to occupants, is highly culpable and blameworthy conduct.
III.         Analysis
                     Mr. Hills does not challenge the constitutionality of s. 244.2(3)(b) in relation to his own circumstances. Rather, he does so on the basis of a hypothetical offender put forth at trial. As such, it is necessary to begin by interpreting the scope of the charging provision, s. 244.2(1)(a), to determine the scope of conduct reasonably captured by the offence.
A.           Interpretation of Section 244.2(1)(a)
                     As this Court held in Nur, determining the reasonable reach of an impugned law is essentially a question of statutory interpretation (para. 61). For the majority, McLachlin C.J. elaborated:
At bottom, the court is simply asking: What is the reach of the law? What kind of conduct may the law reasonably be expected to catch? What is the law’s reasonably foreseeable impact? Courts have always asked these questions in construing the scope of offences and in determining their constitutionality. [Emphasis added; para. 61.]
                    To determine the reasonable reach of s. 244.2(1)(a), I must read the words of the provision in their entire context, in their grammatical and ordinary sense harmoniously with the scheme of the Criminal Code, its object, and the intention of Parliament (R. Sullivan, The Construction of Statutes (7th ed. 2022), at § 2.01(1)). This modern approach is supplemented by the presumption that Parliament intended to enact legislation in conformity with the Charter. If a provision can be read both in a way that is constitutional and in a way that is not, the former reading should be adopted (Sullivan, at § 16.01; R. v. Sharpe, 2001 SCC 2, 1 S.C.R. 45, at para. 33). The “real intention of the legislature must be sought, and the meaning compatible with its goals applied” (R. v. Hasselwander, 1993 CanLII 90 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 398, at p. 413, citing P.‑A. Côté, The Interpretation of Legislation in Canada (2nd ed. 1991); see also Sullivan, at § 2.01(2)).
                    Unlike s. 244.2(1)(b), the text of s. 244.2(1)(a) does not expressly require an offender to be “reckless as to the life or safety of another person”. However, for the reasons below, I conclude that both offences under s. 244.2(1) require, at minimum, a subjective appreciation of potential harm or danger to others. Contrary to the broad interpretation favoured by my colleague, the impugned provision is sufficiently narrow in scope to exclude grossly disproportionate sentences for the kind of conduct the law may reasonably be expected to catch.
(1)          Legislative Intent
                     Section 244.2 of the Criminal Code was enacted in 2009, as part of Parliament’s response to the intentional and reckless discharge of firearms. The Minister of Justice described the purpose of s. 244.2 as follows:
We also are proposing that a new offence be added to the Criminal Code which would target drive‑by and other intentional shootings involving reckless disregard for the life or safety of others.
 
. . .
 
Currently offences available to prosecute these kinds of cases include careless use of a firearm or discharge of a firearm with intent to cause bodily harm. The negligence based offences do not appropriately capture the severity of a drive‑by scenario which involves consciously reckless conduct.
 
Section 244 on the other hand requires proof that the firearm was discharged at a particular person with a specific intent to cause bodily harm, and this is not good enough. While more appropriate if the shooter does have a particular target, it can sometimes be difficult to prove a drive‑by shooting scenario where the intent is to intimidate a rival gang, or in many cases the shooter may just be firing wildly without any particular target.
 
Our proposed offence [s. 244.2] will fill a gap in the Criminal Code and provide a tailored response to this behaviour. This new offence requires proof that the accused specifically turned his or her mind to the fact that discharging his or her firearm would jeopardize the life or safety of another person, and appreciating this fact, the accused still went ahead. Quite simply, these individuals just do not care. [Emphasis added.]
 
(House of Commons Debates, vol. 144, No. 29, 2nd Sess., 40th Parl., March 12, 2009, at pp. 1687‑88)
                     As such, Parliament intended to target an offender who “specifically turned his or her mind to the fact that discharging his or her firearm would jeopardize the life or safety of another person”. This was confirmed throughout the legislative debates:
This offence is aimed at those who would intentionally discharge their firearm with a reckless attitude toward the life or safety of another person. In other words, it does not focus on any specifically intended consequences but rather targets the deliberate disregard for another person’s safety.
 
There is something particularly disturbing to me about a situation in which someone specifically turns their mind to the fact that the shooting of a firearm would put the lives of others at risk, but in spite of this fact goes ahead and shoots anyway. This activity cries out for a strong response, and Bill C‑14 delivers it. [Emphasis added.]
 
(House of Commons Debates, March 12, 2009, at p. 1702 (Ms. Dona Cadman))
 
 
Bill C‑14 proposes amendments in four broad areas.
 
. . .
 
Second, it creates a new offence to target reckless shootings involving the intentional disregard for the life or safety of another person. [Emphasis added.]
 
(House of Commons Debates, vol. 144, No. 45, 2nd Sess., 40th Parl., April 24, 2009, at p. 2675 (Mr. Daniel Petit); see also similar comments made in Debates of the Senate, vol. 146, No. 31, 2nd Sess., 40th Parl., May 5, 2009, at pp. 732‑33 (Hon. John D. Wallace).)
                    As a preliminary matter, then, it is clear that Parliament did not intend s. 244.2 to capture the reckless discharge of firearms generally, or in situations which otherwise present “little danger to the public” (Martin J.’s reasons, at paras. 5, 164 and 169). Rather, in both s. 244.2(1)(a) and s. 244.2(1)(b), it targeted shootings involving the “intentional disregard” for the lives or safety of others, in situations that “put the lives of others at risk”.
(2)          The Elements of Section 244.2(1)(a)
                    Against this legislative backdrop, I turn to the elements of s. 244.2(1)(a). The actus reus of the offence is not disputed, requiring that an offender discharge a firearm into or at a “place”, broadly defined in s. 244.2(2) to include any building or structure. I agree with Martin J. that the actus reus does not require any person to be present at the “place” where the firearm is discharged (paras. 8 and 156‑59). However, we part ways on the “wide” scope of the offence, which she says is “due mainly to the actus reus” (para. 164). In my view, the scope of the offence is narrowed significantly by the accompanying mental element, as I explain below.
(a)           Double Mens Rea
                    Section 244.2(1)(a) has a double mens rea requirement: (1) the intentional discharge of a firearm; and (2) knowledge of or recklessness as to the presence of occupants. Accordingly, an offender cannot know, or even think, that “nobody is around” or be “thoughtless as to whether anyone is present” (Martin J.’s reasons, at paras. 159‑60 (emphasis in original deleted)) when he intentionally discharges a firearm into or at a building or other place. Rather, he must know it is occupied or be reckless, which requires “knowledge of a danger or risk and persistence in a course of conduct which creates a risk that the prohibited result will occur” (Sansregret v. The Queen, 1985 CanLII 79 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 570, at p. 584). The culpability in recklessness is justified by consciousness of risk and proceeding in the face of it, a positive state of mind compared to negligence‑based offences or “thoughtless[ness]” (Martin J.’s reasons, at para. 160). At minimum, then, an offender under s. 244.2(1)(a) must have knowledge of the risk of occupants and nonetheless proceed, in the face of that risk, to intentionally shoot into or at a building or other place.
                    The double mens rea required under s. 244.2(1)(a) must also be interpreted in light of the object and purpose of the section. Through s. 244.2(1), Parliament intended to capture the discharge of firearms in situations which jeopardized the lives or safety of others. It did so by enacting two offences, in paras. (a) and (b): first, where an offender intentionally shoots into or at a building or other place, knowing of or being reckless as to the presence of occupants; and second, in other situations where an offender intentionally shoots while being reckless as to the lives or safety of others. In my view, s. 244.2(1)(a) is an enumerated example of a shooting — into or at a building or other place, with knowledge of or recklessness as to the presence of occupants — which jeopardizes the lives or safety of others.
                    A subjective appreciation of potential harm or danger may be easier to establish in classic “drive‑by” scenarios, or when an offender otherwise intentionally shoots into or at a building or other place under s. 244.2(1)(a), than in the case of reckless shootings generally under s. 244.2(1)(b). But it would be nonsensical, and contrary to Parliament’s expressly stated intent, to interpret s. 244.2(1)(a) to apply to shootings where an offender does not, at minimum, subjectively and recklessly disregard the possibility of risk to the lives or safety of others. In my view, knowledge of or recklessness as to the mere presence of occupants is insufficient to attract liability. Rather, both prongs of s. 244.2(1) were intended to target shootings in which the offender has turned his mind to the fact that he is placing others at risk.
(b)          Previous Interpretations of Section 244.2(1)(a)
                    My interpretation of the scope of s. 244.2(1)(a), narrower than that of my colleague, is consistent with that of appellate courts which have considered the provision. In R. v. Oud, 2016 BCCA 332, 339 C.C.C. (3d) 379, the Court of Appeal for British Columbia held that the offence targets “all intentional discharges of firearms in situations highly dangerous to others, with knowledge or recklessness” (para. 35 (emphasis added)). While it is true that the court did not have the benefit of expert firearms evidence to evaluate a hypothetical scenario similar to that posed by Mr. Hills in this case, it nonetheless interpreted the elements of the offence restrictively, finding that s. 244.2(1)(a) is “sufficiently specific in its application” and that it “does not cast an overly broad net” (para. 32). I could not agree more.
                    My colleague Martin J. focuses on the import of the expert evidence introduced in this case, which, according to the sentencing judge, “cured” the “evidentiary gap” in Oud; namely, whether firing a projectile from a pellet or air‑powered gun is far less serious than discharging a regular gun (Martin J.’s reasons, at paras. 151 and 158). However, the court in Oud concluded that “[t]he offence is narrowly cast and the gravity of the offence puts this mandatory minimum sentence within the range of proportionate sentences for every reasonabl[y] foreseeable hypothetical” (para. 51 (emphasis added)).
                     Similarly, in R. v. Itturiligaq, 2020 NUCA 6, the Nunavut Court of Appeal held that a four‑year sentence was not grossly disproportionate for a man who intentionally fired a hunting rifle at the roofline of a house he knew to be occupied. The single bullet exited the roof and caused no injuries. As in Oud, the court found the offence to be targeted at the “deliberate and dangerous conduct of firing a gun into an open space or place . . . knowing, or being reckless as to whether, others may be present” (para. 48 (CanLII)). Parliament’s purpose was to “create an offence that prohibited the intentional discharge of a firearm in circumstances where the shooter turned their mind to the fact that firing the gun could put the life or safety of other persons at risk” (para. 47 (emphasis added)).
(3)          Conclusion on the Ambit of Section 244.2(1)(a)
                    In my view, s. 244.2(1) should not be interpreted to capture a person “firing a paintball gun at a house when nobody is around” (Martin J.’s reasons, at para. 159 (emphasis in original)). With respect, this broad interpretation of the scope of the conduct falling within s. 244.2(1) is divorced from the legislative context and the object and purpose of the provision. Interpreted correctly, the double mens rea requirement of s. 244.2(1)(a) captures only offenders who intentionally discharge a firearm into or at a building or other place with knowledge of or recklessness as to the presence of occupants — and thus, who have turned their mind to the fact that shooting the firearm could put the lives or safety of others at risk. This interpretation gives effect to the presumption of constitutional compliance and the real intention of Parliament, which explicitly targeted offenders with a subjective appreciation of the fact that discharging their firearm would jeopardize lives or safety.
(4)          Effect of the Crown’s Concession
                     Before applying my interpretation of s. 244.2(1)(a) to the hypothetical posed by Mr. Hills at trial, I wish to briefly address the nature of the concession made by the Crown during the voir dire submissions:
. . . I think it’s fair to say, without -- as my friend puts it -- without outright conceding that the hypothetical itself could give rise -- I think it’s fairly clear that the hypothetical proposed a young person with a pellet gun shooting at a structure where homeless people are known to sometimes be, it would be a grossly disproportionate sentence in the circumstances in light of the expert evidence which was presented by my friend.
 
(A.R., vol. I, at p. 252)
                     The Crown further noted that the defence, through its firearms expert, had “perfected the loose hypothetical as was before the Court in British Columbia in the Oud case”, which it summarized as “not supported in the evidence in terms of whether or not that would constitute a firearm at law, what the likelihood of harm from that weapon would be” (p. 252).
                    In my view, the Crown clearly conceded the validity of the hypothetical: that “there are classes of firearms [as defined in the Criminal Code] which are incapable of penetrating a very simple structure” (p. 252), based on the accepted evidence of the defence expert. As an evidentiary matter, it stated that there was “no further evidence that needs to be presented in order to further establish the hypothetical” (p. 253). However, the Crown did not, in my view, concede that the elements of the offence would be established in the defence’s hypothetical. The Crown subsequently clarified that the “Crown’s submission, obviously, is that it can be dealt with by reading down” (p. 254).
                    As such, whether the Crown conceded that shooting at a barn “where homeless people are known to sometimes be” may result in a grossly disproportionate four‑year sentence is largely irrelevant, and not disputed. The primary effect of the concession was the Crown’s acceptance of the fact that certain firearms could not penetrate a residential wall. However, I do not view the Crown’s position to be that the mens rea of the offence would be established in the barn scenario, without more, or that such a scenario would be a reasonably foreseeable application of s. 244.2(1)(a). Regardless, on a proper interpretation of s. 244.2(1)(a), shooting at a barn would be excluded absent knowledge of or recklessness as to the presence of occupants, and thus a subjective appreciation of a risk to the lives or safety of others.
B.            Application of the Two‑Stage Nur Framework
(1)          What Is a Fit and Proportionate Sentence for the Section 244.2(1)(a) Offence?
                    For the reasons below, I would reject Martin J.’s view that a “suspended sentence of up to 12 months’ probation” (para. 162) would ever be a fit and proportionate sentence under s. 244.2(1)(a). The question becomes whether, on a proper interpretation of the elements of the offence, s. 244.2(1)(a) nonetheless captures reasonably foreseeable cases for which a four‑year sentence would be grossly disproportionate (Oud, at para. 50). I conclude that it does not. While potentially excessive, the impugned minimum is not so excessive as to outrage standards of decency or be abhorrent or intolerable to Canadian society.
(a)           Mere Probation Is Not a Proportionate Sentence
                    Martin J.’s disposition of this appeal turns on the hypothetical case put forth by Mr. Hills at trial described as a “young person intentionally discharg[ing] an air‑powered pistol or rifle . . . at a residence” (2018 ABQB 945, 79 Alta. L.R. (6th) 161, at para. 14). She would find this to be a reasonably foreseeable scenario within the scope of s. 244.2(1)(a), for which a sentence of probation would be appropriate. I disagree. This scenario, without more, does not involve the kind of conduct that the law may reasonably be expected to catch (Nur, at para. 61). I say this for three reasons.
                    First, the young offender put forth by Mr. Hills is crafted primarily on the offence’s actus reus. There is no sufficient basis on which to conclude that the requisite mens rea would be satisfied. Missing from the hypothetical is whether the offender turned his mind to the presence of occupants, and the corresponding risk to lives or safety, when choosing to intentionally shoot at a building. I do not dispute that the actus reus, on its own, would extend to a wide range of conduct, including the air‑powered pistol or rifle hypothetical framed by defence counsel. But it is s. 244.2(1)(a)’s double mens rea requirement that serves to limit the scope of conduct properly caught within its ambit. This double mens rea renders offenders highly culpable and blameworthy.
                     Second, the majority’s position is premised on the notion that the “foreseeable” scenario raised by Mr. Hills presents “little danger to the public”. I disagree. On a proper interpretation of s. 244.2(1)(a), an offender must have turned his mind to the fact that discharging the firearm would jeopardize the lives or safety of others. Moreover, a firearm, by definition, must be “capable of causing serious bodily injury or death to a person” (Criminal Code, s. 2). Regardless of whether firearms include certain air‑powered devices, s. 244.2(1)(a) targets only the use of those air‑powered rifles or pistols which are capable of inflicting serious or deadly consequences. As discussed, it does not capture a person “firing a paintball gun at a house when nobody is around” (Martin J.’s reasons, at para. 159), which an accused does not know when he pulls the trigger. The seriousness of the offence, aimed at deliberately reckless conduct, would be entirely different if an accused knew at the time of commission of the offence that he was shooting at an empty building.
                     My colleague’s position depends, in effect, on the presence of a residential wall to protect occupants. With respect, this ignores or minimizes other risks inherent when a person chooses to intentionally discharge a life‑threatening firearm at a building. At the Court of Appeal, Antonio J.A. discussed these risks, including the possibility that bullets could go through a window or door, psychological effects on occupants or neighbours, the risk of a violent reaction from a target or bystander, and more broadly, the impact on the feeling of safety in communities (2020 ABCA 263, 9 Alta. L.R. (7th) 226, at paras. 80‑82). In the companion case of Hilbach, my colleague cites similar risks, including the “risk of life‑altering physical injury when air‑powered firearms are used in the course of a robbery”, and states that the “risk of psychological trauma arising from the use of an air‑powered rifle remains similar to that of a conventional firearm” (para. 98). She further notes the possibility of escalating violence and the difficulty in distinguishing between air‑powered and conventional weapons. In my view, these same considerations apply in cases of intentional shootings under s. 244.2(1)(a).
                     My colleague concedes that “firing a hunting rifle at a house is very severe and blameworthy conduct”, as in Mr. Hills’ case (para. 164). In my view, this is true irrespective of whether a bullet from that rifle could, in fact, go through the wall of a given home. The relevance of the residential wall distinction is undercut by the fact that even conventional weapons, including commonly used hunting rifles, may not be able to penetrate typical brick‑based walls. In this case, the defence expert’s report dealt “exclusively with wood‑framed wall assemblies”, but appended was a prior study which concluded that “typical walls constructed with brick or a brick veneer are highly resistant to bullet perforation from all conventional firearms, including handguns and common hunting rifles” (A.R., vol. I, at p. 393 (emphasis added)). These brick‑based walls “could only be perforated with the very largest of conventional firearms”, such as a .50 calibre Browning machine gun (p. 393). While air‑powered rifles are undoubtedly less dangerous than conventional firearms, they remain capable of inflicting serious injury or death. Whether certain firearms can in fact penetrate a particular residential wall should not be the dispositive factor in assessing the constitutionality of s. 244.2(1)(a).
                     Third, despite my colleague’s focus on the “youthful” nature of the hypothetical offender (at paras. 161 and 165), the mandatory minimum punishments in the Criminal Code do not apply to youth offenders under the Youth Criminal Justice Act, S.C. 2002, c. 1, that is, offenders under the age of 18. While age may be a mitigating factor in determining a fit and proportionate sentence, and while rehabilitation remains an important principle in sentencing, my colleague’s focus on “youthful offenders” must be placed in context.
                     At bottom, intentionally shooting any firearm — which, by definition, must be capable of causing serious injury or death — into or at a building or other place, with knowledge of or recklessness as to the presence of occupants, is highly dangerous and culpable conduct. In such cases, the absence of serious injury or death will just be a matter of luck (Oud, at para. 61). I reject the notion that an offence committed under s. 244.2(1)(a), properly interpreted, could be “at most, a minor form of mischief” or that the offence otherwise poses “little or no danger” (Martin J.’s reasons, at para. 167), given the requisite mens rea and the gravity of the conduct.
                    For these reasons, I conclude that mere probation is not a fit and proportionate sentence in a reasonably foreseeable application of s. 244.2(1)(a).
(b)          A Fit and Proportionate Sentence Requires, at Minimum, a Period of Incarceration
                    In the case of hypothetical offenders, courts need not, and cannot possibly, fix a sentence or range at a specific point. Rather, courts should “consider, even implicitly, the rough scale of the appropriate sentence” (Lloyd, at para. 23). The inquiry into cases that s. 244.2(1)(a) may reasonably be expected to capture must be grounded in judicial experience and common sense (Nur, at para. 62). This excludes the use of far‑fetched or remote examples and the use of personal characteristics to construct the most innocent and sympathetic case imaginable (para. 75).
                    On a proper interpretation of the impugned provision, I have difficulty conceiving of a reasonably foreseeable case in which less than a multi‑year sentence would be fit and proportionate based on “the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender” under s. 718.1 of the Criminal Code. The fundamental principle of sentencing, proportionality, requires a sentence that is severe enough to denounce the offence but that does not exceed what is just and appropriate, given the moral blameworthiness of the offender and the gravity of the offence (Bissonnette, at para. 50). Regardless of the ultimate consequences, s. 244.2(1)(a) targets deliberately reckless and dangerous shootings, with firearms that are by definition capable of causing life‑threatening injury. It is the recklessness of the behaviour — the potential for harm, whether or not that risk materializes — which is severe and highly blameworthy, and which makes a period of incarceration a proportionate sentence.
                    My colleague’s comparison to the sentences imposed in R. v. Pretty, 2005 BCCA 52, 208 B.C.A.C. 79, R. v. Schnare, N.S.J. No. 118 (QL), 1988 CarswellNS 568 (WL) (C.A.), and R. v. Cheung, Gee and Gee (1977), 5 A.R. 356 (S.C. (Trial Div.)), helps illustrate the difference between s. 244.2(1)(a) and “mischief” offences which date back decades. It is more than unclear whether the pellet guns used in those cases would ever be classified as firearms and, more importantly, whether the offenders would satisfy the double mens rea required by s. 244.2(1)(a). Properly interpreted, s. 244.2(1)(a) captures only an accused who “specifically turned his or her mind to the fact that discharging his or her firearm would jeopardize the life or safety of another person, and appreciating this fact . . . still went ahead” (House of Commons Debates, March 12, 2009, at pp. 1687‑88). I cannot agree that this constitutes a “minor form of mischief” (Martin J.’s reasons, at para. 167). There is no indication that offenders similar to those in Pretty, Schnare, or Cheung have ever been charged under s. 244.2(1)(a), nor would they be, on a proper interpretation of the elements of the offence.
                    By way of more recent reference, the 19‑year‑old accused in Nur was sentenced to 40 months’ imprisonment for mere possession of a loaded prohibited firearm (R. v. Nur, 2013 ONCA 677, 117 O.R. (3d) 401, aff’d 2015 SCC 15, 1 S.C.R. 773). This is, understandably, lower than the s. 244.2(1)(a) sentences upheld in recent years by appellate courts for the intentional shooting of firearms in Itturiligaq (four years), R. v. McMillan, 2016 MBCA 12, 326 Man. R. (2d) 56 (four years), Oud (five years) and R. v. Lyta, 2013 NUCA 10, 561 A.R. 146 (five years). Those offences were all committed with conventional firearms. However, substituting air‑powered firearms would not reduce the gravity of the offences and the culpability of the offenders sufficiently to justify a sentence less than half the length of that deemed to be fit and proportionate in Itturiligaq, McMillan, Oud and Lyta. By definition, all firearms must be capable of causing serious bodily injury or death.
                    In my view, a sentence of two years should properly be considered the low end of the range of fit and proportionate sentences in reasonably foreseeable applications of s. 244.2(1)(a).
(2)          Is a Four‑Year Sentence Grossly Disproportionate to the Fit and Proportionate Sentence?
                    The minimum four‑year sentence imposed by s. 244.2(3)(b) would, at the floor of the range of fit and proportionate sentences, double the period of incarceration in reasonably foreseeable cases. The effects of this should not be minimized and may be devastating. However, I cannot conclude, as a constitutional matter, that this additional period of imprisonment would meet the high threshold established by this Court for cruel and unusual punishment.
                    A sentence oversteps constitutional limits when it is grossly disproportionate, not merely excessive (Bissonnette, at para. 61). The sentence must be “so excessive as to outrage standards of decency” (Smith, at p. 1072, citing Miller, at p. 688, per Laskin C.J.; Lloyd, at para. 24), and “abhorrent or intolerable” to society (Boudreault, at para. 126, citing Lloyd, at para. 24; Smith, at p. 1072; Morrisey, at para. 26). As Chief Justice Wagner, writing for a unanimous Court, held more recently in Bissonnette, it must be “so excessive as to be incompatible with human dignity” (para. 60).
                     As a result, it is only on rare and unique occasions that a court will find, and has found, a sentence to be so grossly disproportionate that it violates s. 12 of the Charter (see Steele v. Mountain Institution, 1990 CanLII 50 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 1385, at p. 1417, per Cory J.; Boudreault, at paras. 127‑128, per Côté J., dissenting, but not on this point; Bissonnette, at para. 70). Courts must properly show deference to Parliament’s policy decisions with respect to sentencing (Bissonnette, at para. 70; Lloyd, at para. 45). In an oft‑cited passage, Borins Dist. Ct. J. discussed such deference:
It is not for the court to pass on the wisdom of Parliament with respect to the gravity of various offences and the range of penalties which may be imposed upon those found guilty of committing the offences. Parliament has broad discretion in proscribing conduct as criminal and in determining proper punishment. While the final judgment as to whether a punishment exceeds constitutional limits set by the Charter is properly a judicial function, the court should be reluctant to interfere with the considered views of Parliament and then only in the clearest of cases where the punishment prescribed is so excessive when compared with the punishment prescribed for other offences as to outrage standards of decency.
 
(R. v. Guiller (1985), 48 C.R. (3d) 226 (Ont. Dist. Ct.), at p. 238)
                    In my view, a four‑year sentence cannot be said to be “so excessive” as to “be incompatible with human dignity” or otherwise “outrage standards of decency”. The s. 12 threshold is necessarily high in cases where the issue is the length of the punishment, in contrast to punishments which are cruel and unusual by nature, such as torture or castration. I agree with Martin J., writing in the companion appeal in Hilbach, that Parliament is within its rights to emphasize the objectives of deterrence and denunciation in the context of firearms offences (para. 73). A firearm presents the “ultimate threat of death to those in its presence” (R. v. Felawka, 1993 CanLII 36 (SCC), 4 S.C.R. 199, at p. 211). This Court has repeatedly affirmed the denunciatory role of minimum sentences for conduct which offends our society’s “basic code of values” (Morrisey, at para. 47; R. v. M. (C.A.), 1996 CanLII 230 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 500, at para. 81). The intentional shooting of such a life‑threatening firearm into or at a building or other place, with knowledge of or recklessness as to the presence of occupants, is a clear example of conduct which offends Canadian society’s basic code of values.
                    I agree with the conclusions of the Nunavut Court of Appeal and the Court of Appeal for British Columbia, respectively, that s. 244.2(1)(a) “does not go beyond that which is necessary to achieve a valid penal purpose” (Itturiligaq, at para. 95) and “only captures conduct that in all circumstances will be highly blameworthy and antithetical to the peace of the community” (Oud, at para. 44). In emphasizing the high threshold under s. 12, La Forest J. explained that the word “grossly” reflects “this Court’s concern not to hold Parliament to a standard so exacting . . . as to require punishments to be perfectly suited to accommodate the moral nuances of every crime and every offender” (R. v. Lyons, 1987 CanLII 25 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 309, at pp. 344‑45). I agree. In this case, I am “wary of second‑guessing the [policy] choices of our elected representatives” (Nur, at para. 144, per Moldaver J., dissenting) based on a hypothetical scenario that is, in my view, unmoored from judicial experience and common sense.
                     To my knowledge, the hypothetical scenario posed by the appellant has not resulted in a conviction under s. 244.2(1)(a) — nor would it, on my interpretation of the offence, unless the accused had turned his mind to the fact that discharging the firearm would jeopardize the lives or safety of others. The hypothetical is “more imaginary than real” and is not a sound basis on which to nullify Parliament’s considered response to a serious and complex issue (see Nur, at para. 133, per Moldaver J., dissenting).
IV.         Legislative Amendments 
                     Before concluding, I wish to briefly comment on An Act to amend the Criminal Code and the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, S.C. 2022, c. 15. The legislation, which received royal assent on November 17, 2022, amended the text of s. 244.2(3)(b) and repealed s. 344(1)(a.1) of the Criminal Code (at issue in Hilbach), thereby removing the four‑year minimum at issue in this appeal for s. 244.2(1) offences committed with non‑restricted or non‑prohibited firearms.
                     This legislation reflects a policy choice by the government which is not relevant in determining whether the former law infringed s. 12 of the Charter (Canada (Attorney General) v. PHS Community Services Society, 2011 SCC 44, 3 S.C.R. 134, at para. 104). While the Minister of Justice acknowledged generally, in the context of introducing the legislation, that certain mandatory minimums have the potential to lead to sentences that may be viewed as grossly disproportionate, I agree with the Director of Public Prosecutions that this cannot be seen as an acknowledgment that any specific provision or minimum is or was not Charter‑compliant. As with the original enactment of s. 244.2 in 2009, it is within Parliament’s mandate to regulate firearms‑related offences as it sees fit. This includes balancing objectives of deterrence and denunciation with those of rehabilitation, proportionality, and judicial discretion in sentencing.
V.           Conclusion
                    Properly interpreted, s. 244.2(1)(a) captures offenders who intentionally shoot a firearm into or at a building or other place, knowing of or being reckless as to the presence of occupants, and who have thus turned their mind to the fact that discharging their firearm could jeopardize the lives or safety of others. In my view, a four‑year minimum sentence for such conduct is not “so excessive as to outrage standards of decency” or “incompatible with human dignity” to rise to the level of cruel and unusual punishment under s. 12. I would dismiss Mr. Hills’ appeal.
