./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/qc/ca/2023qcca34.html
        
The appellant appeals from an oral interlocutory judgment rendered pursuant to a voir dire held on January 6, 2021, by the Court of Québec, district of Abitibi, which declared that an oral statement by the complainant recorded on video and a subsequent written statement were admissible as evidence.[1]
        
The case involves a matter of conjugal violence that occurred in Nunavik, Kuujjuaq. The appeal pertains only to trial file no. 208, namely the events that occurred on May 26, 2020. At trial, this file had been combined with another file involving prior events, file no. 195, in which there was an acquittal.
        
Responding to a complaint from a neighbour who had heard fighting, police officers went to the complainant’s apartment on May 26, 2020. The appellant was present in the apartment and was placed in preventive custody. At that time, police officer Dupuis-Miron met with the complainant and turned on her body camera. The complainant gave a statement, which was recorded.[2]
        
In the video, the complainant immediately states that the appellant assaulted and beat her. She provides a verbal and physical description of his actions. She is agitated. She is bleeding and her left cheek is visibly quite swollen. The complainant says she wants to make a statement in Inuktitut, but she is able to express herself in English. The police officer encourages her to provide an initial version in English and tells her she can meet with a police officer fluent in Inuktitut the following day.
        
The next day, officer Stevenson met with the complainant at her apartment. Officer Stevenson’s mother tongue is Inuktitut. The officer sat near the complainant and took her statement in the complainant’s language, transcribing it into English. The complainant was close enough to see what the police officer was writing on the statement form. After it was completed, the complainant signed the statement.
        
The trial in file no. 195 had been scheduled to begin in December 2019, but the complainant could not be located. At the hearing, the appellant stated, “She is not going to show up…”. The case was rescheduled for two days later to provide an opportunity to locate the complainant, but she was still untraceable. The case was postponed and, in the meantime, the appellant was released. The events of May 26, 2020 occurred while the appellant was subject to an order prohibiting him from having contact with the complainant, which had been issued in file no. 195.
        
The trial in both files was scheduled for December 8, 2020 (or rescheduled in the case of file no. 195). On that date, the complainant was still absent because she was hospitalized in Montreal. The prosecution asked for a postponement, which the judge refused, stating that despite the prosecution’s best and reasonable efforts to ensure the complainant’s presence in court, it seemed unlikely that she would appear at a later date and that the proceedings against the appellant should not be further delayed.
        
The trial therefore took place. Relying on the principled exception to the hearsay rule, the prosecution sought permission to file into evidence the complainant’s statement recorded on the police officer’s body camera on May 26, 2020 and the May 27, 2020 written statement taken down by officer Stevenson. After a voir dire, the judge admitted both statements. The appellant was convicted on the charges of assault causing bodily harm, uttering threats to cause death or bodily harm, and breach of conditions.
        
The appeal pertains to the decision to admit the complainant’s out-of-court statements made on May 26 and 27, 2020.
      The appellant argues that the two statements do not satisfy the necessity criterion or the procedural and substantive reliability tests. On the procedural front, he argues that there are insufficient procedural safeguards to substitute for an oath, a promise to tell the truth or a cross-examination. He also argues that the judge erred in finding that the statements were substantively reliable.
      Contrary to what the appellant contends, the necessity criterion was clearly met in this case. The judge did not err. The appellant argues that the trial could have been held on the basis of circumstantial evidence, without the out-of-court statements. Even if there was some circumstantial evidence of the commission of the offences, it appears obvious that in a conjugal violence case, where the only two direct witnesses were the parties involved, the complainant’s version was crucial. As indicated, the prosecution made considerable efforts to ensure the presence of the complainant, but to no avail. On the day of the trial, she was hospitalized in Montreal and could simply not be present. The judge dismissed the prosecutor’s request to postpone the trial, which prompted the request to admit the two out-of-court statements as evidence.
      The determination of the reliability of the two statements involves a discretionary balancing exercise. With respect to procedural reliability, in the absence of cross-examination, the evidence must “provide a satisfactory basis for the trier of fact to rationally evaluate the truth and accuracy of the hearsay statement”.Thus, in certain cases, a video recording of a statement will be an appropriate substitute for the traditional guarantees of reliability[4].
      As for substantive reliability, it is established when the statement “is made under circumstances which substantially negate the possibility that the declarant was untruthful or mistaken”.What must be determined is whether the statement is inherently trustworthy. The trial judge must be “satisfied that the statement is ‘so reliable that contemporaneous cross-examination of the declarant would add little if anything to the process’”.In other words, the cross-examination would be superfluous.[7]
      As this Court previously acknowledged in R. c. Guzoraky, the dangers associated with hearsay evidence can be overcome through a test of procedural reliability or substantive reliability.Although the two branches are equivalent and alternative means for establishing the threshold reliability of an out-of-court statement,they also work in tandem and inform each other.[10]
      Finally, the principled exception to the hearsay rule must be applied flexibly, so that it can be adapted to a variety of situations.The trial judge is in the best position to determine [translation] “the extent to which the hearsay dangers exist”.[12]
      The judge applied the correct legal principles. His judgment, rendered orally, is well structured and reasoned. The judge was of the view that procedural and substantive reliability had been established for both statements, on a balance of probabilities.He made no reviewable error in the exercise of his discretion.
      The statements are short and were made immediately after the occurrence of the events in the case of the first one, and shortly thereafter in the case of the second. 
      The first statement was recorded. The police officers did not ask leading questions, and the complainant gave her version spontaneously. There was evidence corroborating the statements’ reliability, including the neighbour’s complaint and the complainant’s fresh injuries, which are clearly visible on the body camera video. In the recording, the complainant, who is visibly agitated and crying, provides a physical description of the choking she says she experienced in the previous minutes. If the complainant had been drinking, she did not appear to be intoxicated, as officer Dupuis-Miron in fact testified. 
      As regards the second statement, the police officer took particular care to ensure the accuracy of the facts garnered from the complainant in Inuktitut and she was able to read the officer’s transcription in English all along. The complainant’s version was consistent with her previous day’s statement.
      In the particular circumstances of this case, the judge committed no reviewable error. A cross-examination would only have provided peripheral details and that both statements appeared to be inherently reliable and credible. The interests of justice weigh in favour of admitting the statements into evidence. FOR THESE REASONS, THE COURT:
      DISMISSES the appeal.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/qc/ca/2023qcca57.html
        
The appellant was granted leave to appeal from a conviction following a plea of guilty in the court below. 
        
He had been charged by the Provincial Crown with several drug offences committed in Quebec and it was understood that his sentence was to be served concurrently with the sentence he would receive for a pending file prosecuted by the Federal Crown in Ontario.
        
The appellant had arranged for his file to be transferred from Ontario to Quebec, with the consent of the Attorney General of Ontario. The appellant was to plead guilty at the same time to all charges, in both files, and the Provincial Crown would have presented a suggestion for a concurrent sentence. 
        
However, due to administrative delays, the transfer of the Ontario file was not timely. Therefore, not without reluctance, the appellant accepted to, first, plead guilty for the Quebec offences and later to the Ontario offences. When the plea for the Ontario offences was offered, the Federal Crown asked that his sentence be served consecutively. 
        
The parties requested a facilitation conference and agreed to proceed without a formal hearing. They submit that the plea was involuntary in the Quebec file. Affidavits from appellant and his former counsel were filed. The respondent agrees that the appellant was told that a common suggestion would be presented for concurrent sentences. 
        
In sum, due to unforeseen events, the suggestion could not and was not presented to the judge. Because of the position taken by the Federal Crown, a consecutive sentence resulted. In fairness to the appellant, the prosecution supports the withdrawal of his plea and a new trial.
 
        
A different result from a joint submission will not, as a matter of principle, support a plea withdrawal. However, in view of the concession by the respondent and the very particular course of events, a new trial is justified. FOR THOSE REASONS, THE COURT:
        
GRANTS the appeal;
        
ORDERS a new trial in file 500-01-175280-186.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/qc/ca/2023qcca89.html
        
The appeal filed in this case relates to a firearms prohibition order made by the Court of Québec, Criminal and Penal Division, pursuant to subsection 111(5) Cr.C.
        
The Crown seeks the summary dismissal of the appeal on the ground that it should have been filed with the Superior Court.
        
I agree. As per section 84 and subsection 111(8) Cr.C., an appeal from an order made pursuant to subsection 111(5) must be filed with the Superior Court. Moreover, subsection 685(2) Cr.C. empowers a judge of the Court to summarily dismiss an appeal that ought to have been filed with another court. FOR THESE REASONS, THE UNDERSIGNED:
        
GRANTS the motion to dismiss the appeal summarily;
        
DISMISSES the appeal.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/qc/ca/2023qcca13.html
        
Hamish McKillop appeals from a judgment rendered on October 16, 2019, by the Honourable Gaston-Paul Langevin, J.C.Q., district of Gatineau, who found the appellant guilty on two counts: sexual assault (s. 271(a) Cr.C.) and assault (s. 266(a) Cr.C.) on the complainant, his then common-law partner.
        
The verdict rests exclusively on the credibility of the witnesses. Although the appellant did not testify, the prosecution introduced into evidence his lengthy police interview given before the charges were laid. 
        
The appellant claims that the judge erred in law in four ways. First, he erred in applying the well-known principles of R. v. W.(D.), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 742, when he limited himself to a “credibility contest” between the complainant’s version and that of the appellant. In so doing, the judge ignored several contradictions in the complainant’s testimony and made errors of fact. Second, the judge’s analysis shows that he reversed the burden of proof. Third, the judge erred in rejecting the defence of honest belief in the complainant’s consent to the appellant’s advances that resulted in touching of a sexual nature. Finally, fourth, because of the errors discussed, the judge erred in rejecting the appellant’s denial of the existence of the alleged acts and in finding him guilty of assault. 
        
The arguments are without merit. A review of the judgment shows no error of law. The judge stated that he considered all of the evidence and demonstrated that he had. While it is true that the judge did not mention all the inaccuracies and nuances of the complainant’s testimony, he was not required to do so: R. v. G.F., 2021 SCC 20, para. 76.
        
The Crown acknowledged some errors of fact and also conceded that the decision was sometimes unclear. For example, it is true that the complainant never testified that the appellant had persisted to the point where he had, in fact, had sexual intercourse with her while she was under the influence of medication. It is also true that the judge wrote “the next morning she would realize more what happened”, when the evidence is silent in this respect. 
        
Other errors, described by the appellant as contradictions, are more akin to nuances, such as the fact that the complainant testified that the appellant was “trying to break” an object of value to her, when in her written out-of-court statement she had instead said that the appellant was “threatening to break” that object.
        
The Court agrees with the respondent that the errors invoked do not affect the core of the judge’s reasoning. More specifically, the appellant has not shown that the nuances not commented on by the judge would in any event be determinative, individually or collectively, of the reliability or credibility of the complainant’s testimony. 
        
The charges cover a period of approximately six months and use general terms: “commit a sexual assault” and “commit an assault.” It should be noted that the appellant never required the Crown to furnish particulars and specify the events in dispute, nor did he complain, either at trial or on appeal, that he was prejudiced at trial by such broad language. 
        
The events happened when the appellant and the complainant lived together. The complainant described many assaults and sexual assaults. It should be added that the appellant himself confirmed, during his police interview filed into evidence, that, at best, he was generally reckless about the complainant’s consent. He admitted being upset by the complainant’s refusals. Given these refusals, and in view of their particularly difficult relationship in general, but also specifically when it came to intimacy, the appellant should have ensured that the complainant consented, which he clearly never did, thus shutting the door to any mens rea defence based on an honest but mistaken belief in consent, because the defence is only available when the “complainant communicated consent to engage in the sexual activity in question”: R. v. J.A., 2011 SCC 28 (CanLII), 2 S.C.R. 440, para. 48. 
     
The evidence supports that conclusion. With respect to the count of sexual assault, the complainant recalled numerous assaults over the period covered by the charge. The assaults generally occurred at bedtime, when the appellant kissed her and touched her naked body, hoping for more sexual activity. According to the evidence, this unwanted behaviour was discussed between the complainant and the appellant, but he persisted. 
     
The complainant did not want to engage in sexual activities with the appellant. Sometimes the complainant would turn her back to him, sometimes she would say “no”, but the appellant would continue, kissing her and touching her breasts and genitals. Sometimes he would get upset, asking for more sex. 
     
It is true that the complainant’s testimony is not consistent with her police statement, in which she stated that the appellant had been verbally, but not physically, insistent on having sexual relations with her. As the Crown points out, this aspect was not lost on the judge, as indicated by his specific remarks at trial. Although he did not explicitly address the point in his reasons, he concluded that the appellant had sexually touched the complainant’s body at these times.
     
The complainant testified that because of the appellant’s persistence, she sometimes gave in and had full sexual relations with him. In short, she submitted to him. On this point, the Supreme Court held: “This does not mean that a failure to tell the accused to stop means that the complainant must have been consenting.  As this Court has repeatedly held, the complainant is not required to express her lack of consent for the actus reus to be established.  Rather, the question is whether the complainant subjectively consented in her mind”. R. v. J.A., 2011 SCC 28 (CanLII), [2011] 2 SCR 440, para. 41.
     
The complainant testified that, on one occasion, the following morning, she explained to the appellant that: 
“[…] the way he was behaving, it was rape, and... that... he got so upset­­ and that is when the physical abuse started. But he didn’t stop pressuring me into having sex with him until I broke up with him.” Appellant’s brief, p. 94. [transcribed verbatim]
     
In cross-examination, the complainant made it clear that she “told [the appellant] many times that if [she] wanted to have sex with him, he would know”: Appellant’s brief, p. 186.  
     
The appellant’s statement, while not explicitly incriminating as the Crown asserted, nevertheless provides context that may confirm the complainant’s lack of expressed consent: The sexual allegations are to do with... there’s some misunderstandings with her medication. She has some medication that she was on that would make her very drow... like, drowzy,... […] ... and... at night, and we would initiate foreplay for, you know, for sexual act and... she’d be uttering... she would be communicating but, not very intelligibly, I thought she was just... tired, like, but I didn’t know that... So I would, I know, initiate sex and then... and... and then she would say “no, I don’t, you know, I don’t feel... I don’t feel this is... this is... like, I’m too tired.” So... But two (2) or three (3) minutes in - or maybe less - I stopped. I did not continue. Or [follow] through or anything like that. Appellant’s brief, p. 233. [transcribed verbatim]
     
While the appellant does not admit to having sexually touched the complainant in this sequence of events, he also does not specify that it was only verbal. The statement was evidence that the judge had to interpret in context. It supported the judge’s conclusion that the appellant was confirming the complainant’s version that his insistence was manifested by sexually touching her when she had indicated to him, either verbally or by her behaviour, that she did not consent.
     
The appellant also confirmed the complainant’s testimony regarding their discussion about his conduct: I genuinely thought that she was just a little tired or drowsy. I didn’t know that it was due to her medication and, so... but I got to stop, you know. And then... and then later, when she recalled that instance, she would use it as ammunition or as... I means to... to say, you know, “you’re a sexual predator” or, you know, allegations like that. And... this is what I think should be... like, this kind of allegation should not be taken... Appellant’s brief, p. 234. [transcribed verbatim]
     
Again, the Supreme Court has said that “the defence of honest but mistaken belief in communicated consent is not unlimited”: R. v. Barton, 2019 SCC 33 (CanLII), 2 S.C.R. 579, para. 101. The law imposes a precondition to this defence: s. 273.2(b) Cr.C. An accused must take reasonable steps, in the circumstances known to him or her at the time, to ascertain that the complainant was consenting. No reasonable steps, no defence: R. v. Barton, 2 S.C.R. 579, para. 104; R. v. Ofter, 2022 QCCA 439, para. 30 ; R. v. I.A.D., 2021 ONCA 110.
     
While the appellant said that he always respected the complainant’s wishes not to have sex and that he stopped after a few minutes when he was unsuccessful in convincing her, this, however, is of no assistance to him. The Supreme Court ruled: […] Similarly, it would be perverse to think that a sexual assault could constitute a reasonable step […]. Accordingly, an accused’s attempt to “test the waters” by recklessly or knowingly engaging in non-consensual sexual touching cannot be considered a reasonable step. This is a particularly acute issue in the context of unconscious or semi-conscious complainants […]. R. v. Barton, 2019 SCC 33 (CanLII), [2019] 2 S.C.R. 579, at para. 107 [references omitted]
     
All in all, the evidence supports the judge’s conclusion that the appellant could not have been unaware that the complainant had repeatedly expressed her disinterest in receiving sexual touches of any kind. The evidence, including the appellant’s repetitive conduct without taking reasonable steps to ascertain that the complainant was consenting, lends support to the judge’s finding that the actus reus and mens rea of sexual assault had been proved. 
     
The complainant also testified to physical assaults that occurred in various situations. In particular, the appellant allegedly grabbed her by the throat during verbal arguments. The complainant acknowledged that she had a blurrier recollection of the details of these events. However, in his statement, the appellant also acknowledged violent events of a similar, though slightly different, nature. He admitted that at different times, to get the complainant’s attention during an argument, he grabbed her by the jaw or blocked her path and grabbed her wrist, or while they were in their car, he grabbed her by the throat. This constitutes assault. 
     
In sum, the judge was entitled to conclude that the evidence did not raise any reasonable doubt as to the occurrence of the assaults and that the prosecution had proved them beyond a reasonable doubt. FOR THESE REASONS, THE COURT:
     
DISMISSES the appeal;
     
ORDERS the appellant to report to the Hull Detention Centre, before noon on January 13, 2023.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/qc/cq/2023qccq15.html
     
Xiomara Martinez was found guilty of conspiracy to traffic in heroin between January 1, 2018 and June 30, 2018, contrary to section 465 (1) c) of the Criminal Code (Cr. C.).[1]
     
As explained in the decision on conviction, Ms. Martinez was a participant in a conspiracy to traffic heroin with a criminal organization involving 10 individuals. The organization, led by Dany Durand, was well structured with each of its members having specific roles and responsibilities.  The organization paid $5,750 for each package of 50 g of heroin and replenished its stock approximately every 5 days. One member separated the packages of 50 g of heroin into smaller bags for sale on the street. Several managers coordinated pickups of the heroin and were responsible for supervising the runners (or couriers), who in turn would supply the drugs to the street sellers and collect the profits. Each street seller was given a specific pre-established work shift and would report to a supervisor. 
     
Although the exact role played by Ms. Martinez in this organization was not established, the evidence did prove that she was a participant and met with co‑conspirators in furtherance of the conspiracy on four occasions, between May 1, 2019 and June 25, 2019.
     
The Crown recommends a sentence of 5 years, underscoring the dangers of heroin and referring to the sentences imposed on seven co-accused which range from 3 years to 8 years and 3 months, reflecting the involvement and profile of each.Ms. Martinez emphasizes her limited involvement in the conspiracy as well as several attenuating factors. She suggests a sentence of 12 months. GUIDING PRINCIPLES
     
Section 718 Cr. C. provides that the fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society and to contribute to the respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society. This purpose is met by the imposition of sanctions intended to meet one or more of the following objectives: a) to denounce unlawful conduct; b) to deter the offender and others from committing offences; c) to separate offenders from society when necessary; d) to assist in rehabilitating offenders; e) to provide reparation for harm done to victims or to the community; f) to promote a sense of responsibility in offenders and acknowledgment of the harm done to victims and to the community.
     
A sentence should be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences (sec.718.2 (b)). 
     
An offender should not be deprived of liberty if less restrictive sanctions may be appropriate in the circumstances (sec. 718.2 (d) and (e)). 
     
The Court must consider the mitigating and aggravating circumstances (sec. 718.2 (a)) in striving to determine a just sentence which must fundamentally be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender (sec 718.1). PROFILE OF MS. MARTINEZ / AGGRAVATING AND MITIGATING CIRCUMSTANCES: 
     
Ms. Martinez is 46 years old. She was born in El Salvador, where she grew up until her family moved to Canada when she was 14 years old. She is now a dual citizen of both countries. She is the co-owner and manager of a family business which operates an employment agency in the food industry. She also owns a garage that manages the maintenance of the vehicles used by the agency. She has no criminal record.
   Ms. Martinez maintains her innocence and chose not to testify at her trial as is her constitutional right. Because of her silence with respect to her participation in this conspiracy, the presentence report does not shed any light on the factors that may have led her to become involved with this criminal organization.[3]
   There is no evidence of Ms. Martinez being addicted to drugs or a drug user at all. The only inference that can be drawn, given the nature of this conspiracy, is that she participated in it for financial gain. There is no evidence here of any awareness nor of any introspection on her part about the consequences of her crime that might serve to lower the risk of reoffending. It should be noted, however, that the absence of mitigating factors − although useful in comparing her situation to that of other offenders − is not to be considered as an aggravating factor.
   The principal mitigating factor in this matter is the fact that until now, Ms. Martinez has been a productive member of society. She is self- employed and has no prior criminal record. The aggravating factor is the nature of the drugs involved in this conspiracy. The jurisprudence is replete with reminders about the devastating consequences of heroin use, and its pernicious and addictive nature. APPROPRIATE RANGE OF SENTENCES / PARITY OF SENTENCES
   In order to ensure that the sentence imposed is just and appropriate, the Court must consider sentences imposed in similar matters. Of course, each case is to be individualized and must take into account the particular circumstances of the offender. Distinctions must also be drawn between the circumstances of Ms. Martinez and those of her co-accused who have received their sentences. In addition, the Court stresses that the sentence to be imposed here is for one count of conspiracy only. Although the maximum sentence for conspiracy to traffic heroin is the same as the maximum sentence for trafficking (the maximum penalty is life imprisonment in both cases), in reviewing sentences imposed in similar matters, the Court will consider that Ms. Matinez has not been found guilty of trafficking. As the Supreme Court of Canada has stated, evidence that an offender committed the substantive offence will generally lead to a harsher sentence than if he or she had conspired to commit it but had not actually done so.[4]
   The sentence here must reflect the fact that Ms. Martinez participated in a conspiracy to traffic in heroin, one of the most dangerous drugs sold on the street. The acute dangers and high cost to society associated with the trafficking of hard drugs was most recently underscored by the Supreme Court of Canada in R v. Parranto:
      The dangers posed by trafficking in hard drugs, such as heroin and cocaine, have long been recognized in Canada. Over the past few decades, however, society’s awareness of the true gravity of trafficking in such drugs has grown to the point that we are reminded, on a daily basis, of the death, destruction, and havoc it causes in communities across Canada.
      Trafficking in such substances causes both direct and indirect harms to society. Directly, the distribution and abuse of hard drugs leads to addiction, debilitating adverse health effects, and, all too frequently, death by overdose. […]
      Trafficking also leads indirectly to a host of other ills, including an increase in all manner of crime, committed by those seeking to finance their addiction, as well as by organized crime syndicates […] Given that much of this criminal activity is violent, trafficking has come to be understood as an offence of violence, even beyond the ruinous consequences it has for those who abuse drugs and in the process, destroy themselves and others. Indeed, as Doherty J.A. has explained, violence is such a predictable consequence of the illicit drug trade that it cannot be dissociated from it: Cocaine sale and use is closely and strongly associated with violent crime. Cocaine importation begets a multiplicity of violent acts. Viewed in isolation from the conduct which inevitably follows the importation of cocaine, the act itself is not a violent one in the strict sense. It cannot, however, be disassociated from its inevitable consequences. 
(R. v. Hamilton (2004), 2004 CanLII 5549 (ON CA), 72 O.R. (3d) 1 (C.A), at para. 104) […]
      A further and perhaps even more devastating consequence of the hard drug trade is its impact on families and the intergenerational trauma it causes: Trafficking in drugs, and in particular hard drugs such as cocaine, is a crime whose victims can be found far beyond the individuals who become addicted to the drugs. Families can be torn apart by either the loss of the individual to the addiction itself or to the violence that all too often accompanies the drug trade. Children suffer immense harm from the effects of addiction in their home, whether this addiction be from pre‑natal impact or from physical and/or emotional violence in the homes that they should be safe in. The future of these children and their families is damaged and all of society pays the price. (R. v. Profeit, 2009 YKTC 39, at paras. 25‑26 (CanLII).
      Finally, the trafficking of hard drugs leads to “significant if not staggering” costs to society in terms of health care and law enforcement expenses, as well as lost productivity […] 
[references omitted]
   Recently, in imposing sentence in the case of R. v. Salem,Mascia J. canvassed the range of sentences for offenses involving heroin, as well as the rationale for imposing harsh sentences, which stems primarily from the goal of deterrence in these matters.
   The review of the caselaw in Salemestablishes that “absent exceptional circumstances, even first offenders trafficking in small quantities will be handed jail sentences − usually in a penitentiary”.Deterrence is the overriding sentencing principle in these cases, even for the addict who sells heroin to feed his habit.In Salem, exceptional circumstancesjustified a lenient sentence of  two years less a day (less 50 days counted as pretrial custody)which was well below the usual range.
   In R. v. DiBenedetto,the Ontario Court of Appeal confirmed a range of sentence of 6 to 12 years for offences involving trafficking of between 0.5 and 1 kg. of heroin. 
   As to the parity of sentences with those imposed on the co‑accused in this file, based on the evidence at trial, Ms. Martinez’ role was lesser than any of the co‑accused already sentenced. As mentioned above, on four occasions Ms. Martinez met with a co‑conspirator in furtherance of their common goal.
   The leader of the conspiracy and those that were heavily involved in the group’s activities received sentences of between five and eight years, following their early guilty pleas.There is no suggestion that their involvement is in any way commensurate with that of Ms. Martinez.
   Lesser sentences were imposed on two co-conspirators. Simon Leclerc, 30 years old, pleaded guilty and acknowledged that he was involved in the conspiracy from October 2017 to June 2018. His involvement began as a courier.  He delivered money to Durand, the leader of the group, and retrieved packages of 50 g of heroin on at least two occasions. His role became that of a packer, in charge of separating 50 g of heroin into smaller bags for which he received $500 a week. In addition to the counts of conspiracy to traffic in heroin and trafficking in heroin, he also pleaded guilty to breach of conditions for having broken his curfew, contrary to the conditions of his release. Taking into account a positive presentence report, the absence of any prior convictions, the full support of his law-abiding family, his remorse, his efforts to address both his personal difficulties and his drug dependence through therapy, and considering a low risk of reoffending, the sentence imposed was three and a half years.
   François Jarry, 36 years old, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to traffic in heroin and trafficking in heroin from October 2017 to May 2018. He acted as a courier for the organization, picking up both money and drugs. The evidence established that he transported 50 g of heroin on four different occasions, receiving $500 each time, and was not deterred in his activities as a courier even after he was arrested with heroin in his possession during the course of this investigation. He had a criminal record consisting of four counts of failure to respect court conditions or conditions of a probation order between 2011 and 2014. The presentence report noted that his arrest in this matter led to positive changes in his life, namely moving away from his network of criminal acquaintances, and total abstinence from drugs and alcohol. Those efforts were seen as lessening the risk of recidivism, nevertheless the risk was deemed to be present in the medium and long-term. He received a sentence of three years.
   In both of those cases (Leclerc and Jarry), despite the seriousness of the offenses and the significant involvement of each accused in the conspiracy, the sentence reflected their positive steps taken towards rehabilitation. CONCUSION
   In view of all the factors set out above and taking into account the range of sentences, the Court finds no justification for imposing a sentence significantly higher on Ms. Martinez than those imposed for Leclerc and Jarry. It is true that their sentences reflected mitigating factors which are absent here (guilty pleas, rehabilitation), however, the sentence to be imposed here is for one count of conspiracy, whereas Leclerc and Jarry were also guilty of trafficking heroin. Furthermore, the evidence established that their involvement in the conspiracy was considerably greater than that of Ms. Martinez.
   Even taking account of the lesser involvement of Ms Martinez, there is no doubt that the 12-month sentence she proposes is markedly and inexplicably below the appropriate range for this type of offenseand does not reflect the devastation caused by heroin. As mentioned above, the Court has no evidence of any mitigating circumstances apart from the absence of any prior record.
   The Tribunal will sentence Ms. Martinez to a period of imprisonment of 30 months; a sentence meant to deter others from similar conduct, and to express society’s condemnation of this type of activity, while considering the particular circumstances of this offender.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/qc/cq/2023qccq86.html
 Has the Applicant’s right to be tried in a reasonable time been infringed?
 The Tribunal concludes that the net delay exceeds the ceiling of 18 months established by the Supreme Court in Jordanand is presumptively unreasonable.
 Furthermore, the Respondent did not rebut the presumption by establishing the presence of exceptional circumstances.
 Accordingly, a stay of proceedings is the only remedy. FACTS
 The facts are described in the Applicant’s Motion, and they are the following.
 On May 23, 2020, the Applicant, Roger Seguin, is charged with driving while his capacities were impaired by alcohol and with a level of alcohol that exceeded the limit.
 The information by summary conviction was laid on October 29, 2020.
 Mr. Seguin appeared on December 9, 2020.  Me Abel appeared for him as a “friend of the Court” and assisted him in adjourning the matter to February 24, 2021.
 On February 24, 2021, Me Barrière appeared and addressed the matter.  Mr. Seguin was not present.  A bench warrant was issued.
      
Mr. Seguin took the steps to have the matter listed in Court on March 11, 2021.  The warrant was rescinded as Mr. Seguin was advised he did not need to be present on February 24, 2021.
      
At that date, Mr. Seguin advised the Court he had found a lawyer (Me Amber) and the matter was adjourned for 8 weeks for the purpose of counsel to take the file.
      
On May 11, 2021, Me Amber appeared formally on the record and received more disclosure.  (He had asked initial disclosure on April 7, 2021 and received it on May 3, 2021).
      
The matter was adjourned to June 2, 2021, for the purpose of reviewing the disclosure and requesting additional disclosure.
      
On May 25, 2021, an additional disclosure request was sent to the Crown.
      
On June 2, 2021, an adjournment was granted for the purpose of waiting to receive the additional disclosure requested.
      
On July 21, 2021, the matter returned and was adjourned again to obtain the additional disclosure requested.
      
On August 9, 2021, some additional disclosure was received by Me Amber.
      
On September 20, 2021, there was still outstanding disclosure, and the matter was adjourned to November 10, 2021.
      
On November 10, 2021, the matter was adjourned to set a trial in the management Court.
      
On November 12, 2021, the matter was in management Court.  The trial was set to March 16, 2022, in Courtroom 5 for 4 hours.
      
On that date, there was a discussion concerning the Courtroom to set the trial.  The Crown requested to potentially set the trial in Courtroom 5, but the judge indicated that this was not an option, owing the length of the trial being over the 2 hours limit for that room.
      
The Crown informed the presiding judge that there was no available trial date before May and that would be above the 18 months ceiling.
      
The presiding judge then permitted the trial to be scheduled in Courtroom 5 on March 16, 2022. 
      
On December 7, 2021, the coordinating judge’s secretary informed the Crown and the Defence that the matter couldn’t be scheduled on March 16, 2022 in Courtroom 5 because of it’s length and the matter would be in the management Court on December 17, 2021 to set a new date.
      
The matter was adjourned to January 28, 2022, in order for the Crown and the Defence to file a new form for the setting of the trial.
      
On January 28, 2022, the trial date was set on August 16, 2022, for 6 hours.
      
On February 22, 2022, Me Amber received the last item of the disclosure he requested.
      
On August 16, 2022, the trial began. 
Examination of the first Crown’s witness was not complete and a continuation was required.  It is to be noted that the second Crown’s witness who was subpoenaed was not present.
      
November 17, 2022 was the first trial continuation date.  Me Amber was not available but both parties were available for the second date offered, November 30, 2022, date when the Motion for a stay of proceedings was presented. LAW
      
On July 8, 2016, the Supreme Court rendered judgment in the JordanCase and ended the delays’ framework of analysis established in Morinfor the application of section 11b) of the Charter.
      
The Supreme Court in Jordanset out a new framework to assess whether delay is unreasonable.
      
What is this new framework of analysis?
      
Ceilings are established beyond which delay is presumptively unreasonable: 18 months for cases going to trial in Provincial Court and 30 months for cases going to trial in Superior Court or cases going to trial in Provincial Court after a preliminary inquiry[5]. 
      
If the total delay from the charge to the actual or anticipated end of trial (minus Defence delay) exceeds the delay, then the delay is presumptively unreasonable.
      
The Crown can rebut this presumption by establishing the presence of exceptional circumstances.  If not, the delay is unreasonable.
      
According to the Supreme Court, the presence of exceptional circumstances is the only basis upon which the Crown can discharge its burden to justify a delay exceeding the ceiling[6].
      
Exceptional circumstances are reasonably unforeseen or reasonably unavoidable and the Crown cannot remedy the delays.
      
These exceptional circumstances fall under two categories: discrete events and particular complex cases.
      
First, calculation of the delay from the charge to the actual or anticipated end of trial has to be done, followed by the subtraction of the delay attributable to the Defence either waived or caused solely by its conduct.
      
If the total delay from the charge to the actual or anticipated end of trial is above the ceiling, then, the delay is presumptively unreasonable and, if the Crown cannot rebut the presumption by the establishment of exceptional circumstances, the Tribunal shall stay the proceedings.
      
If the total delay from the charge to the actual or anticipated end of trial falls below the ceiling, then the onus is on the accused to show that the delay is unreasonable.  To do so, the accused must establish: .           
He took meaningful steps that demonstrate a sustained effort to expedite the proceedings; .           
The case took markedly longer than it reasonably should have. ANALYSIS
      
Before analysing the delays contested in issue, it is important to emphasize that the Court of Appeal decided that this “(…) analysis is not fixed and it is necessary to rely on the good sense of trial judges to determine the reasonableness of the delay in the circumstances of each case[7]”. According to the Supreme Court, the analysis must always be contextual[8].
      
The parties agree that the total delay from the charge to the actual or anticipated end of trial is 762 days[9].
      
Once the total delay is determined, delay attributable to the Defence must be subtracted.
      
According to the Crown, 358 days should be subtracted from the total delay as Defence delay and exceptional circumstances, for a remaining delay of 405 days below the ceiling.
      
According to the Defence, there are 13 days of Defence delay and 15 days attributable to exceptional circumstances, which leaves a total delay of 734 days.
      
According to the Crown, the delay of 15 days between February 24, 2021 and March 11, 2021 is attributable to the Defence.
      
The Court disagrees with this argument.  Mr. Seguin was informed in a letter by a Legal Aid’s lawyer that his presence was not necessary on February 24, 2021.  Mr. Seguin being not formally represented by Legal Aid, a warrant was issued, which Mr. Seguin when informed of it took the steps to have the case filed in Court to cancel the warrant.
      
The Court concludes that this delay is a discrete event and should be subtracted.
      
The Crown argues that the delay between September 20, 2021 to August 16, 2022 should be subtracted being either Defence delay or exceptional circumstances, which is a delay of 330 days.
      
According to the Crown, she was ready to set the date for the trial on September 20, 2021.
      
The Crown refers to Ramsurrunwhere the Court of Appeal referring to Cody stated : « lorsque le tribunal et le ministère public sont prêts à procéder mais que la défense ne l’est pas, le délai qui en résulte devrait également être déduit, sous réserve de son droit de se préparer adéquatement. »
      
This argument is contested by the Defence.
      
The delay between September 20, 2021, to November 10, 2021, is attributable to additional disclosure. This delay cannot be a Defence delay.  Additional disclosure was asked without an objection from the Crown on the fact that she was ready to set the date anyhow.
      
It is the same with the delay from November 10, 2021, to August 16, 2022.  There are 2 days attributable to set the file in the management Court.  This is an institutional delay.
      
As it is with the delay between November 12, 2021, to August 16, 2022.  This delay cannot be counted as Defence delay.  Both parties erred on how they handled the file.  It seems that the form wasn’t complete and the file set for trial in a Courtroom against the Court rules.
      
This situation was remedied by the coordinating judge and another date was set for the trial.
      
This situation is not an exceptional circumstance.  Unfortunately, the delay caused by the situation is nothing more than institutional delay.
      
This delay cannot be subtracted from the total delay.
      
The Court concludes that only 28 days can be subtracted from the delay which leaves a net delay of 734 days, which is above the ceiling of 548 days.
      
The delay being over 548 days or 18 months, the delay is presumed unreasonable, and the Respondent has the onus to show the existence of exceptional circumstances.
      
Were these exceptional circumstances in this matter?
      
The Court finds that the Respondent did not show the existence of exceptional circumstances.
      
The Tribunal concludes that the delay is unreasonable.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/nb/ca/2023nbca6.html
                                                             
At the outset of this hearing, the appellant informed the Court that he wishes to abandon his appeal. His request was granted, and the appeal stands abandoned.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/nb/pc/2023nbpc1.html 1.      In a single count Information laid before this Court on February 14th, 2022, James Crawford (“Mr. Crawford”), who is 84 years-old, was charged with committing indictable assault causing bodily harm against his wife of 59 years, Ms. Fredericka Lane Crawford (“Ms. Crawford”), contrary to Section 267(b) of the Criminal Code of Canada (the “Criminal Code”). 2.      Mr. Crawford is deaf. He suffered a complete loss of his hearing late in life at age 74 owing to the cumulative effect of industrial occupational noise exposure over his lengthy career. He worked for more than 50 years as a high-pressure welder and pipefitter, mostly in Western Canada. Mr. Crawford had to retire when his hearing failed. 
3.      Mr. Crawford cannot communicate via American Sign Language and he does not read lips. His only means of communicating is through the use of technology or via the exchange of 
handwritten notes, though he is still fully capable of expressing himself verbally. Mr. Crawford participated fully in all stages of these proceedings with the benefit of the voice to text function on the Microsoft Teams software platform, arrangements for which were made between Court Services, the Crown and Mr. Crawford’s legal counsel.       
4.      With the Crown’s consent, Mr. Crawford entered a guilty plea to the lesser and included offence of summary assault causing bodily harm against Ms. Crawford on October 12th, 2022. A Pre-Sentence Report was ordered and a Victim Impact Statement was requested from Ms. Crawford. Given Mr. Crawford’s hearing disability, the Court directed counsel to prepare an Agreed Statement of Facts for the next appearance date. 
5.      Mr. Crawford’s guilty plea on the lesser and included offence of summary assault causing bodily harm, as supported by the Agreed Statement of Facts reviewed and signed by Mr. Crawford on December 2nd, 2022, was accepted by this Court on that same date. Accordingly, this matter proceeded immediately on that date to a Sentencing Hearing where the Crown and counsel for Mr. Crawford made what can fairly be described as widely divergent sentencing submissions to this Court. 
6.      Owing to the significant delta between the sentencing submissions of counsel, the fact that a considerable amount of case law was provided in support of the respective positions advanced by counsel and, most notably, given Mr. Crawford’s hearing disability, this Court reserved its decision on sentencing so that written reasons could be prepared and provided to counsel and to Mr. Crawford. These are those written reasons for decision. 
 
THE FACTS 7.      The Court relies upon and incorporates by reference into this decision the Agreed Statement of Facts, which was marked as Exhibit C-1 at the Sentencing Hearing; however, a somewhat detailed overview of the facts is in order to provide context for the reasoning of this Court in imposing what it concludes to be a fit and appropriate sentence in the circumstances of Mr. Crawford, having regard to the facts and the law and also taking into consideration the submissions of counsel at the Sentencing Hearing. 8.      On January 4th, 2022, Blackville RCMP received a report of an ongoing intimate partner altercation at the residence of Mr. and Ms. Crawford at 86 Main Street in Blackville, New Brunswick (the “Crawford Residence”). The call was received from a Ms. Hallihan, an employee of a nearby Home Hardware that Ms. Crawford had contacted a few days before to fix a drafty window at the Crawford Residence.  
9.      While speaking with Ms. Hallihan on the phone on the morning of January 4th, 2022, Ms. Crawford could be heard engaging in the background with someone she only referred to as “Jimmy”. Ms. Crawford asked Ms. Hallihan if Home Hardware could come to fix the window on another day because “Jimmy” was very agitated. Ms. Crawford explained further to Ms. Hallihan that if repairmen from Home Hardware were to attend that day to carry out the repair, as scheduled, she feared she might “catch a beating from Jimmy”. While still on the phone with Ms. Hallihan, Ms. Crawford started yelling “Jimmy! No! Stop! Let go!” followed by repeated calls for help. By this point, Ms. Hallihan had placed Ms. Crawford on speaker phone so her co-workers could also hear what was transpiring. 
10.  Concerned about Ms. Crawford’s well-being and recognizing the Crawford Residence was nearby, repairmen from Home Hardware immediately left to check on Ms. Crawford. Mr. Crawford met the Home Hardware repairmen outside the Crawford Residence upon their arrival a few minutes later and told them to “fuck off and leave”. 
11.  Blackville RCMP were called by Ms. Hallihan at approximately the same time and, upon arriving at the Crawford Residence, Constable Dallas Delisle (“Constable Delisle”) observed some small blood stains on Ms. Crawford’s white sweater and a worsening lump/bruise around her right eye. A visibly upset Ms. Crawford pleaded with Constable Delisle to leave. 
12.  A series of 21 photographs taken by Constable Delisle, which were marked as Exhibit C-2 at the Sentencing Hearing, were taken of Ms. Crawford’s injuries as they were observed on January 4th, 2022. Mr. Crawford was found by Constable Delisle in a bedroom at the far end of the hallway of the Crawford Residence and was placed under arrest for assault. Mr. Crawford briefly attempted to resist arrest but, soon after, cooperated and was transported to the Blackville RCMP detachment for processing. 13.  Ms. Crawford initially declined to provide a statement to the RCMP but ultimately changed her mind. According to her statement, which is included in Exhibit C-1 and, therefore, forms part of the Agreed Statement of Facts, she contacted Home Hardware to arrange for them to attend at the Crawford Residence to fix the window “on another day” on the morning of January 4th, 2022. She explained to the representative of Home Hardware, presumably Ms. Hallihan, that “my husband is very upset with me for calling”, “it will be very difficult for me if he sees you here” and “I’ll be in touch with you at a later date”. According to Ms. Crawford’s statement, when the repairmen from Home Hardware showed up at the Crawford Residence they stopped at one of the windows to check something, Mr. Crawford observed them, went to the front door and told them to “get the so and so off the property”. 
14.  After the Home Hardware repairmen left, Mr. Crawford grabbed Ms. Crawford by the throat and shook her. Ms. Crawford screamed at her husband “Jimmy, you gotta stop! You can’t be beating me like this. You gotta stop!”. In her words, she was scared “…and then it started. Bang, bang, bang and mostly around my head, my shoulders, and then all of a sudden I’m on the floor in the corner and he’s kicking the living daylights out of me now. He was in his stocking feet. He didn’t have any boots or shoes on but he just kicked me.” 
15.  Mr. Crawford then “roared at me to get up and I couldn’t get up. I knew I was hurt but I had to try. I knew I couldn’t stand up from the position I was in, so I used the chair and the sink and I got up.” When Ms. Crawford managed to return to her feet after the first stage of what ultimately became an extended assault, Mr. Crawford, again using her words, “got me by the throat and threw me right across the floor” which caused her to hit her head on a cupboard door. 
16.  At this point, Mr. Crawford continued the assault on his wife by administering another series of kicks to her. Ms. Crawford’s statement indicated “he came at me with his legs apart like this just boom, boom, boom, kicking me like a crazy person and I roared at him ‘you’ve got to stop!’”. A knock at the door temporarily interrupted the ongoing assault. Ms. Crawford explained that Mr. Crawford answered the door and was asked “Jimmy, is everything okay?”, to which he responded “yes”. The same person then asked Ms. Crawford if she was okay and she answered “yes, I am fine. I am okay”. The person at the door then left and, according to Ms. Crawford, “he was no more down the steps and Jimmy went at me again and he grabbed the toaster. I heard the toaster coming off the counter and, bang, he hit me with the toaster across my head”. This lengthy assault finally concluded after Mr. Crawford administered a few more “head punches” to his wife. 
17.  Exhibit C-2 shows a considerable amount of light to moderate bruising on various parts of Ms. Crawford’s body, including above and below her left eye, on her hands and feet, on her left arm above the elbow, on her neck, above her right breast, on the back of her right shoulder and across her lower back. Darker and more extensive bruising covered much of her left buttock. As earlier noted, Ms. Crawford was wearing a white sweater at the time of the assault and two or three small blood stains are visible on the breast and shoulder areas of same. It should be noted that when the RCMP arrested Mr. Crawford he was found to have a minor cut on his wrist that was bleeding. None of the photographs of Ms. Crawford’s injuries comprising Exhibit C-2 show any blood or lacerations, so it is unknown whether the small blood stains found on her sweater came from her or from Mr. Crawford’s wound.                   
MR. CRAWFORD’S BACKGROUND 18.  As is noted in the Introduction to this decision, Mr. Crawford is 84 years-old and has been married to Ms. Crawford for 59 years. He graduated from high school in the late 1950s and became a high-pressure welder and pipefitter. As is evidenced by the Prior Defendant History Report submitted on consent at the Sentencing Hearing and marked as Exhibit C-3, Mr. Crawford stands before this Court without a Criminal Record. 
19.  A Pre-Sentence Report, dated November 23rd, 2022, was prepared regarding Mr. Crawford (the “PSR”) and it is very positive. The PSR confirms that Mr. Crawford is not an indigenous man. In addition to his hearing disability, as already described, the PSR also notes that Mr. Crawford suffers from cataracts in both eyes resulting in a slight impairment of his vision. Mr. Crawford has lived in Blackville, New Brunswick for his entire life, travelling extensively for work throughout his lengthy career. He and Ms. Crawford have one child together, a daughter named Susan Brophy (“Ms. Brophy”). She lives next door to the Crawford Residence. Ms. Brophy has two daughters with whom Mr. Crawford shares a very close and positive relationship. He derives particular enjoyment from assisting one of his granddaughters in taking care of her livestock. 
20.  Becoming completely deaf at an advanced age owing to industrial occupational noise exposure has had a negative impact on Mr. Crawford’s activities of daily living and his enjoyment of life. Before losing his hearing, one of Mr. Crawford’s biggest passions was music. He played saxophone, clarinet and fiddle in a well-known local band and regularly gave of his talent to raise funds to assist many local causes and people in need. Mr. Crawford’s longstanding record of engagement in his community has extended to a variety of other meaningful pursuits. For example, he was a volunteer firefighter for over 25 years and, for this service, he was awarded the “Fire Services Exemplary Medal” by the Governor General of Canada. 
21.  Mr. Crawford reports no mental health issues or related diagnoses, such as depression, but acknowledges that his struggles with hearing loss have had an adverse impact on him. He has also been experiencing a period of declining physical health in recent years. Five years ago, Mr. Crawford fell from a roof and broke six ribs, punctured his lung and ruptured his spleen. He had his spleen removed as a result of this serious accident and endured a long and difficult recovery. More recently, Mr. Crawford has undergone certain cardiac procedures, including angioplasty. Ms. Brophy participated in the preparation of the PSR and, with the close lens she has on her father’s health, she indicated that Mr. Crawford is in a gradual state of physical decline. 
22.  It is important to emphasize while on the topic of surveying Mr. Crawford’s mental and physical health that there is no indication in the PSR and, more broadly, no medical or other evidence in the record before this Court that Mr. Crawford suffers from any form of dementia or other related medical condition that would assist this Court in understanding whether factors of that nature may have caused or contributed to the aberrant, serious and prolonged assault he perpetrated against his wife.    
23.  As for whether Mr. Crawford has any history of addiction issues, he was unequivocal in noting that he has never consumed alcohol or non-prescribed drugs. In identifying options for Mr. Crawford should this Court seek to have him pursue intimate partner violence or anger management programming as part of his sentence, Probation Services was very direct in acknowledging that Mr. Crawford’s hearing disability coupled with his visual impairment would present some challenges in that regard. This is the case because such programming is only offered via remote/virtual platforms from Moncton, New Brunswick. 
24.  In addressing the Court at the conclusion of the Sentencing Hearing, Mr. Crawford demonstrated contrition for his actions of January 4th, 2022, apologized to Ms. Crawford, adding that he is not a man who often apologizes, and stated to the Court that no incidents of this nature will happen again.                   
 
 
MS. CRAWFORD’S VICTIM IMPACT STATEMENT 25.  Ms. Crawford provided a Victim Impact Statement but declined to have it read in Court. In it, Ms. Crawford explains that she was “devastated by what took place” on January 4th, 2022, and that the period during which she and her husband were separated following these events was particularly difficult for her. Ms. Crawford has been assisted by counselling post-assault and, since being reunited with Mr. Crawford under the same roof, she reports that “my husband makes me happy, content, also satisfied. I believe this will never happen again. If I didn’t believe this I wouldn’t be back home”.      
 
THE ISSUE 26.  The single issue this Court must decide is what is a fit and appropriate sentence for Mr. Crawford.
 
THE SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES
Position of the Crown 27.   The Crown recommends that Mr. Crawford be incarcerated for “a minimum period of 12 months”, arguing that neither a Suspended Sentence nor a Conditional Sentence Order (a “CSO”) would achieve the objectives of sentencing in view of the circumstances and context of this case. In making this recommendation, the Crown acknowledged the strong mitigating factors of an early guilty plea and the absence of a Criminal Record. On the other side of the ledger, the Crown rightly emphasized the severity of the prolonged and violent assault against Ms. Crawford together with the fact that this assault involved the abuse of an intimate partner, which is a statutory aggravating factor under Section 718.2(a)(ii) of the Criminal Code. 
28.  In addition to the period of incarceration sought by the Crown, it also seeks a supervised probation order for a period of 24 months and a lifetime weapons prohibition under Section 110 of the Criminal Code. The Crown’s basis for seeking the latter discretionary order of such a duration is grounded in the fact that Mr. Crawford was earlier subject to a 10-year weapons prohibition order made in January of 2012 in conjunction with an Absolute Discharge imposed on a firearms-related conviction. 
  
29.  In revisiting the contents of Exhibit C-1 at the Sentencing Hearing, the Crown argued that certain comments of Ms. Crawford in her witness statement support the conclusion that this was not her first encounter with intimate partner violence at the hands of her husband. To the extent that such a position was advanced by the Crown, the Court takes this opportunity to very clearly state that there is nothing in the record before it that supports such a conclusion. If an invitation to reach such a conclusion was indeed made by the Crown to this Court, it is respectfully declined. 30.  It should also be noted, as will be highlighted later in this decision, that the Crown consented to Mr. Crawford pleading guilty to the lesser and included offence of summary assault causing bodily harm after originally having charged him on an indictable basis. This is noteworthy given the difference in the maximum term of incarceration that can be imposed by this Court: 10 years for indictable assault causing bodily harm versus two years less a day for the lesser and included summary offence. It also bears mentioning that CSOs are not a sentencing option available in cases of indictable assault causing bodily harm but they are available for the lesser and included summary offence. 
31.  The Crown cited several decisions to anchor its sentencing recommendation. I will briefly consider these authorities in chronological sequence. 
32.  In R. v. Inwood, 1989 CanLII 263 (ON CA), [1989] O.J. No 428 (CA), an appeal of a sentencing decision was pursued by the Crown in circumstances where a suspended sentence was imposed for an assault causing bodily harm on an intimate partner and a one-month custodial sentence was imposed for an assault on their infant son together with a lengthy probation order. The accused, a middle-aged man, had a history of intimate partner violence, as was evidenced by the testimony of five former intimate partners called by the Crown at trial. The assaults in question were protracted, with the accused’s intimate partner having sustained a series of injuries, including bruising in several areas, swelling and lacerations while the infant son’s injuries were more superficial and ultimately found by the trial judge to fall short of causing bodily harm. The trial judge characterized what had transpired in these assaults as the functioning of a "sick mind and a twisted personality". The Court of Appeal of Ontario concluded that a three-month period of incarceration to be followed by a term of probation for three years would have been an appropriate sentence in the circumstances of the assault by the accused against his intimate partner and his infant son but declined reincarcerating the accused owing to a variety of considerations including the significant progress he had made between serving the originally-imposed custodial sentence and the date of the appeal. 
33.  The Crown next referred this Court to the decision of Justice LaVigne in R. v. Bernard, 2005 NBQB 254 (Q.B.). Following a finding of guilt after trial on a single count of indictable assault causing bodily harm against the accused’s intimate partner, Justice LaVigne imposed a sentence of six months incarceration. The accused, a 25-year-old indigenous man, had an extensive Criminal Record, which included at least three recent convictions for assault. Moreover, he was subject to a probation order at the time of this assault. The details of the assault were summarized by Justice LaVigne at paragraph 23 as follows: 23.       Mrs. Gagnon was injured as described in my previous decision in this matter.  She was punched in the face several times and her head was banged against the wall and against the floor.  She suffered a black eye, scratches and bruises.  
34.  In reaching her sentencing decision, Justice LaVigne quoted at length from paragraphs 21 and 22 of the decision of the Court of Appeal of New Brunswick in R. v. Bérubé, 1999 CanLII 32756 (NB CA), [1999] N.B.J. No. 291 (CA), where Justice Drapeau (as he then was) emphasized that sentencing in the context of intimate partner violence “must express society’s intolerance for this type of violence by means of appropriately severe sanctions”. The “paramount considerations in imposing the sentence” in cases of intimate partner violence, wrote Justice LaVigne at paragraph 34, are “general and individual deterrence as well as denunciation…this objective is applicable to all incidents of domestic violence”. 35.  Turning to R. v. Trecartin, 2017 NBQB 71 (CanLII), 2017 NBQB 071 (Q.B.), which involved nine indictable counts primarily directed at an intimate partner, including assault with a weapon, this decision was cited by the Crown for the discrete purpose of grounding the position that the absence or relative absence of serious physical injuries does not dampen or otherwise diminish the lasting and pervasive psychological wounds caused by intimate partner violence. As Justice Christie observed at paragraph 36: “The visible signs of injury are no more significant than the invisible psychological damage that can be done…The cuts may heal and the bruises fade - but the sense of self-doubt, the fear, the anxiety and lingering uncertainty of chances missed may never go away for her”. 36.  Supporting its submission that the advancing age and poor health of Mr. Crawford are not mitigating factors or otherwise a barrier to the imposition of a sentence which would include a period of incarceration in this case, the Crown cited R. v. G.L.C., 2013 NBPC 9 (PC), aff’d 2014 NBCA 21 (CA) and R. v. Dedam 2016 NBQB 223 (QB) (see, in particular, paragraph 50).        
 
Position of the Defence 37.  Counsel for Mr. Crawford submits that this Court ought to impose a Suspended Sentence accompanied by a 24-month supervised probation order. In making this submission, the advancing age, hearing disability, visual impairment and overall deteriorating physical health of Mr. Crawford were heavily emphasized; however, as was pointed out by this Court at the Sentencing Hearing, Mr. Crawford committed the assault causing bodily harm on his wife just over a year ago. Accordingly, there is some incongruity in portraying Mr. Crawford as an aged and severely disabled man who can barely function and is in the final stage of his life when he so recently did what he did to Ms. Crawford. There is no indication in the record before this Court that Mr. Crawford’s health has rapidly deteriorated in the intervening period between the date of the assault against his wife and today’s date. 
38.  Next, Mr. Crawford’s solicitor cited the decision of Justice Riordon in R. v. A.J.G., [1995] N.B.J. No. 529 (Q.B.) to emphasize that the age and health of the accused, who was 76 years-old at the time of sentencing, are indeed relevant sentencing considerations. At paragraphs 18 and 19, Justice Riordon observed that “His age, his health…are all matters that must be considered…He, I think, has certain medical considerations that I must keep in mind and all of these conditions must be considered” in fashioning a fit and appropriate sentence. 
39.  The decision of the Court of Appeal of British Columbia in R. v. Swope, 2015 BCCA 167 (CA), is also relevant on this point. Beginning at paragraph 32, the Court of Appeal of British Columbia had this to say:
 
     I turn, then, to the matter of Mr. Swope's age and health. I acknowledge that, in sentencing an elderly offender, a court must be cognizant of the fact that the limited life expectancy is a factor in gauging the severity of the sentence. In R. v. C.A.M., Lamer C.J., speaking for a unanimous court, said:
 
… [I]n the process of determining a just and appropriate fixed-term sentence of imprisonment, the sentencing judge should be mindful of the age of the offender in applying the relevant principles of sentencing. After a certain point, the utilitarian and normative goals of sentencing will eventually begin to exhaust themselves once a contemplated sentence starts to surpass any reasonable estimation of the offender's remaining natural life span. Accordingly, in exercising his or her specialized discretion under the Code, a sentencing judge should generally refrain from imposing a fixed-term sentence which so greatly exceeds an offender's expected remaining life span that the traditional goals of sentencing, even general deterrence and denunciation, have all but depleted their functional value.
 
       It might also be acknowledged that subjective experience of time in prison is likely to differ with the age of an offender. A person whose health and life are rapidly slipping away may well consider time in jail to be particularly harsh, as their last opportunities for liberty are lost.
 
       The importance of the offender’s anticipated lifespan, as a sentencing consideration should not, however, be overstated. As Finch J. (as he then was) said for the majority of this Court in R. v. Shah (1994), 1994 CanLII 1290 (BC CA), 94 C.C.C.(3d) 45 at 50:
 
[E]ven where there is a risk that an accused may not outlive the time he is required to serve, the compassion that would evoke is not a controlling or decisive factor in deciding on the appropriate sentence. It is one of many factors to be taken into account in sentencing.
 
40.  In R. v. JEB, 2014 ONSC 1921 (SCJ), a 78-year-old accused in poor health was found guilty of several historical sexual assaults involving a minor. There were repeated events over a span of seven years during which time the victim ranged in age between four and 11 years-old. These events happened some 35-40 years before. Justice Quigley declined to follow the Crown’s recommendation that a period of incarceration in the order of 18 to 24 months was appropriate, instead choosing to impose an 18-month CSO accompanied by a 36-month probation order. In imposing this sentence, Justice Quigley emphasized that this was exceptional and that a period of incarceration would normally flow from such serious indictable charges but for the accused’s old age and poor health. 
41.  Finally, counsel for Mr. Crawford relies on R. v. G.V., [1996] N.B.J. No. 317 (Q.B.) to ground the position that a Suspended Sentence with a lengthy period of probation would meet the ends of justice in this case. Before Justice Riordon in R. v. G.V. was the sentencing of an elderly offender in poor health with no criminal record who had committed acts of sexual touching towards two of his grandsons several years before.           
APPLICABLE LAW 42.  The Supreme Court of Canada has recognized that the fitness of a sentence imposed can establish or diminish the credibility of the criminal justice system in the eyes of the public.  
43.  The task is governed by the provisions of the Criminal Code but it involves the exercise of a broad discretion by the courts in balancing all the relevant factors in order to meet the objectives being pursued in sentencing. The purpose and principles of sentence, as set out in the Criminal Code, allow for “sentence individualization"  and guide the sentence this Court must impose. 
44.  Section 718 describes the fundamental purpose of sentencing. It reads: 718. The fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society and to contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions that have one or more of the following objectives: (a)        to denounce unlawful conduct and the harm done to victims or to the community that is caused by unlawful conduct; (b)        to deter the offender and other persons from committing offences; (c)        to separate offenders from society, where necessary; (d)        to assist in rehabilitating offenders; (e)        to provide reparations for harm done to victims or to the community; and (f)         to promote a sense of responsibility in offenders, and acknowledgment of the harm done to victims or to the community. 45.  Section 718 provides further that the imposition of a just sentence requires sufficient manoeuvrability to tailor sentences to the circumstances of the particular offence and the particular offender. 
46.  Before considering the circumstances of the offence and the offender, I will briefly address the objectives and principles of sentencing and highlight those that are predominant in this case. 47.  The objectives described in section 718 may have predominance in a set of circumstances dictated by the offence, the offender or both. This Court is required to attribute to the objectives of denunciation and deterrence their proper predominant influence in the crafting of a just sentence. 48.  Deterrence is subdivided into specific and general elements. Specific deterrence is designed to convince the offender before the Court not to re-offend. The circumstances of the offender and the prospects for rehabilitation must be considered.  A court must look at the individual, his record and attitude, his motivation and his reformation and rehabilitation.  
49.  General deterrence is aimed at persuading others who may be inclined to commit the same offence from so doing. If this is the aim, the sentencing court must consider the gravity of the offence, the incidence of the crime in the community, the harm caused by it either to the individual or to the community and the public attitude toward it.
50.  The separation of an offender from society is sometimes necessary. The application of the objective must be read in concert with section 718.2(e), which essentially requires that imprisonment be the sentence of last resort. 
51.  The maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society, as is mandated by section 718, can often best be achieved by the rehabilitation of offenders. As the Supreme Court of Canada has held, “Rehabilitation is one of the fundamental moral values that distinguish Canadian society from the societies of many other nations in the world” (see R. v. Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64 at para. 4). 
52.  The Criminal Code also holds that the fundamental principle of sentencing is that a sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender. This is a codification of the proportionality principle and is found at section 718.1. 53.  Other principles are important in crafting an appropriate sentence here. First, section 718.2(b) states that "a sentence should be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences committed in similar circumstances." This is a codification of the parity principle. 
54.  Section 718.2(a) indicates that a "sentence should be increased or reduced to account for any relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or the offender." Section 718.2 also dictates that: (d) where consecutive sentences are imposed, the combined sentence should not be unduly long or harsh; (e) an offender should not be deprived of liberty, if less restrictive sanctions may be appropriate in the circumstances; and (f) all available sanctions, other than imprisonment, that are reasonable in the circumstances and consistent with the harm done to victims or to the community should be considered for all offenders, with particular attention to the circumstances of Aboriginal offenders.    
55.  These are the principles that inform the sentencing of Mr. Crawford by this Court. It should be emphasized that denunciation and deterrence, both specific and general, are always key drivers in the identification and imposition of a fit and appropriate sentence in the context of intimate partner violence.  
ANALYSIS 56.  I begin my analysis by inventorying the aggravating and mitigating factors that are present in this case. The aggravating factor working most strongly against Mr. Crawford is that the assault causing bodily harm that he perpetrated against his wife of 59 years falls squarely within the ambit of the abuse of an intimate partner, which is a serious statutory aggravating factor under Section 718.2(a)(ii) of the Criminal Code, as was emphasized by Justice LaVigne in R. v. Bernard and Justice Drapeau (as he then was) in R. v. Bérubé. 
57.  The specific details of this assault are also highly aggravating. In addition to having occurred within the confines of the marital home and within a longstanding relationship of trust, the fact that this assault was prolonged, violent and entirely unprovoked is also aggravating. This assault transpired over several minutes and across several rooms within the Crawford Residence. Moreover, it continued after it was temporarily interrupted by an individual who came to the front door of the Crawford Residence to specifically inquire about whether everything was alright. Indeed, the Agreed Statement of Facts confirms that before this individual had even left the front steps of the Crawford Residence, Mr. Crawford had picked up where he left off by hitting his wife with a toaster and administering further “head punches” to her before this highly disturbing series of events finally came to an end.  
58.  There are also significant mitigating factors that work strongly to the benefit of Mr. Crawford. He entered a plea of guilty at an early stage to the lesser and included summary offence, thereby taking responsibility for his criminality and avoiding the necessity of a trial and its accompanying consumption of limited public resources. His plea of guilty also means that Ms. Crawford was spared from the further trauma of having to take the stand against her husband and revisit these devastating events from a psychological perspective. Moreover, it is also strongly mitigating that Mr. Crawford has no Criminal Record. Finally, it should also be emphasized that Mr. Crawford has been a productive and contributing member of society throughout his entire life and that he has expressed contrition for his criminal actions directed toward his wife.  
59.  Counsel for Mr. Crawford submits that the advancing age, hearing disability, visual impairment and deteriorating physical health of his client also rise to the level of being mitigating factors. Though this Court is not prepared to go so far as to accept these as mitigating factors in the conventional sense, I readily acknowledge that these dimensions and dynamics are all very relevant sentencing considerations for the reasons explained by the British Columbia Court of Appeal in R. v. Swope and by Justice Riordon in R. v. A.J.G. Sentencing judges take each accused as they find them and it is not lost on this Court that Mr. Crawford is an elderly man in declining physical health with more than one disability. Accordingly, these realities have been factored into the crafting of Mr. Crawford’s sentence. 
60.  Before delving into an examination of the sentencing principles most applicable to the circumstances of this case, to the extent that they haven’t already been canvassed, it is important for this Court to address the fact that the Crown consented to Mr. Crawford entering a plea of guilty to the lesser and included charge of summary assault causing bodily harm. I earlier canvassed two important considerations arising from this, namely: (1) the significant difference regarding the maximum term of incarceration that can be imposed (10 years for indictable assault causing bodily harm versus two years less a day for the lesser and included summary offence), and (2) the fact that a CSO is available as a sentencing option in cases of summary assault causing bodily harm. 
61.  Indeed, counsel for Mr. Crawford addressed this latter point explicitly in argument, observing that his client’s plea of guilty to the lesser and included summary offence was intended, among other things, to “preserve certain sentencing options”. I don’t say this to be critical of the Crown but consenting to an accused pleading guilty to the lesser and included offence of summary assault causing bodily harm only to then strenuously press for the sort of sentence that the Crown might more reasonably be expected to ask for had a trial proceeded and a finding of guilt been entered by this Court on the initial charge of indictable assault causing bodily harm is a practice that is best avoided. 62.  The most relevant authority cited by the Crown in support of its sentencing recommendation is R. v. Bernard; however, the circumstances of that case are readily distinguishable on nearly every level relative to the circumstances currently before this Court involving Mr. Crawford. I will highlight a few of these differences: 
a.      Mr. Bernard was found guilty after trial of indictable assault causing bodily harm against his intimate partner, while Mr. Crawford entered a plea of guilty with the Crown’s consent to the lesser and included offence of summary assault causing bodily harm against Ms. Crawford at a very early stage in the proceedings; 
 
b.      Mr. Bernard was 25 years-old at the time of the assault, while Mr. Crawford is 84 years-old;
c.       Mr. Bernard had an extensive Criminal Record, punctuated by at least three recent assault convictions, while Mr. Crawford does not have a Criminal Record;
 
d.      Mr. Bernard was robust and otherwise in good physical health, while Mr. Crawford is elderly, deaf, has a slight visual impairment and is in a state of gradually declining physical health;
 
e.      Mr. Bernard is indigenous. Mr. Crawford is not.
 
f.       
Mr. Bernard, having many more aggravating factors than Mr. Crawford working against him and far fewer mitigating factors than Mr. Crawford working in his favour, was sentenced to six months incarceration by Justice LaVigne taking into consideration the very same principles that guide this Court’s sentencing of Mr. Crawford: less than half the period of incarceration sought by the Crown in the case before this Court.  
 
   
The only common ground between Mr. Bernard’s circumstances and those of Mr. Crawford is that they were both originally charged by the Crown under the same provision of the Criminal Code and that their respective criminal conduct arose in the intimate partner context.  
63.  As is consistently noted in the case law, denunciation and deterrence, both specific and general, are the sentencing principles that figure most prominently in cases of assault against an intimate partner. As earlier discussed, there is no record before this Court evidencing a history of intimate partner violence in the 59-year marriage of Mr. and Ms. Crawford. In Ms. Crawford’s Victim Impact Statement, she reflects upon how difficult her period of separation from her husband was after the assault took place and states “I believe this will never happen again. If I didn’t believe this I wouldn’t be back home”. Finally, there is no indication in the record before this Court that any instances of intimate partner violence have occurred between Mr. and Ms. Crawford since they resumed living together in the Crawford Residence several months ago.   
64.  The sentence to be imposed on Mr. Crawford must send a strong message of denunciation that intimate partner violence is insidious in all forms and the consequences of same will be commensurately severe. The sentence should also be sufficiently severe that it deters Mr. Crawford from committing any future assaults of a similar nature against his wife while also conveying to the broader community in no uncertain terms that this sort of criminality will not be treated lightly by this Court. 65.  In crafting what this Court has determined to be a fit and appropriate sentence, I have considered that Mr. Crawford is an 84-year-old deaf and visually-impaired man in declining physical health. Mr. Crawford appears to be somewhat frail and the PSR objectively outlines verified details regarding his gradual deterioration. Though perhaps stoic about the mental health implications brought on by his hearing disability, as communicated in the PSR, it is not a significant leap for this Court to conclude that completely losing one’s hearing at an advanced age and being unable to continue to work or to communicate without considerable difficulty would be a challenging set of circumstances to navigate. Moreover, many of the activities that Mr. Crawford gained enjoyment from for the duration of his entire adult life, including his musical pursuits, also ended with the onset of his hearing loss. 
66.  This Court is quick to point out that none of these challenges and difficulties explain away Mr. Crawford’s highly aberrant and serious intimate partner violence against his wife. It would, however, be both artificial and contrary to the principles of sentencing to suggest that these factors regarding Mr. Crawford ought to simply be ignored or that they are otherwise irrelevant to the crux of the sentencing exercise, which ultimately comes down to a determination of whether Mr. Crawford ought to serve a custodial or community-based sentence. 67.  This Court has considered the proportionality, parity and totality principles as well as Mr. Crawford’s rehabilitative potential in arriving at what it concludes to be a fit and appropriate sentence in the circumstances of this case. The sentence that this Court has arrived at for Mr. Crawford accords with what has been imposed in similar cases, recognizing that there are many aspects of this case that can fairly be described as unique or as outliers. Suffice it to say, and thankfully so, there is a dearth of reported sentencing decisions in Canada involving acts of intimate partner violence perpetrated by elderly and disabled offenders in states of declining physical health.  
68.  I disagree with the recommendation of the Crown that a period of incarceration is appropriate in this case, let alone the request of “a minimum period of 12 months”. Similarly, I reject the submission of counsel for Mr. Crawford that a Suspended Sentence ought to be imposed given the serious aggravating factors earlier considered, notably the troubling details of this protracted assault causing bodily harm which happened in the intimate partner context. 69.  In reaching these conclusions, I emphasize that CSOs as a sentencing option were introduced by Parliament in 1996. In 2000, the Supreme Court of Canada set out the principles that should guide sentencing judges in assessing whether this type of sentence is appropriate in R. v. Proulx, [2000] 1 S.C.R. 525. 70.  It is important to consider the reason for the introduction of CSOs, as was described by author Clayton Ruby in the eighth edition of his leading text, entitled “Sentencing”, at paragraph 15.2: …in Proulx the Supreme Court recognized that, through the enactment of the conditional sentence provisions, “Parliament has sent a clear message to all Canadian judges that too many people are being sent to prison” and that this problem must be remedied. In sending this message to the courts, Parliament was influenced by many reports in regard to over-incarceration, and “mandated that expanded use be made of restorative principles in sentencing as a result of the general failure of incarceration to rehabilitate offenders and reintegrate them into society. 71.  Imposing this type of sentence in an intimate partner violence case is admittedly problematic in that the offender would potentially be allowed to serve a sentence in the very home in which the offence was committed. Additionally, it is an irrefutable fact that most cases of intimate partner violence occur in the home environment. 72.  As was earlier noted, however, sentencing is by its nature an individualized exercise. Accordingly, the fact that an offence involved intimate partner violence should not preclude this type of sentence in the right circumstances (see, for example, R. v. W.E.S., 2018 BCPC 23 (PC)). I find such circumstances to be present in this case.                   
 
CONCLUSION 73.  In conclusion, this Court finds that a fit and appropriate sentence in the case of Mr. Crawford, having considered the circumstances of the offender and the offence, the applicable law and the submissions of counsel, is a CSO for a period of nine months to be followed by a 24-month supervised probation order. I will address the specific terms of each momentarily, but let me first note that in arriving at this sentencing decision, this Court is satisfied that Mr. Crawford’s service of his sentence in the community would not endanger the safety of the community and that it is consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing that were earlier canvassed.    
74.  Addressing the terms of the CSO first, Mr. Crawford shall be subject to a period of house arrest for 24 hours per day, seven days per week for the first five months of the CSO. He shall serve such period of house arrest at the Crawford Residence, which is situated at 86 Main Street in Blackville, New Brunswick. My reference to the Crawford Residence, for the purpose of this CSO, includes the residence-proper as well as the parcel of land upon which the residence is situated but does not include the immediately adjacent residence of his daughter, Ms. Brophy, or the parcel of land upon which his daughter’s residence rests. 
75.  In addition to the compulsory conditions of the CSO mandated by Section 742.3(a) through (e) of the Criminal Code, Mr. Crawford shall be permitted to leave what I have described as the Crawford Residence during the period of house arrest only in the following circumstances: a.      To attend to a medical emergency or to attend a medical appointment involving himself or an immediate member of his family;
 
b.      To attend any meetings with his Conditional Sentence Supervisor or his solicitor;
c.       To attend any treatment or counselling program deemed appropriate by his Conditional Sentence Supervisor, having regard to the limitations imposed by his hearing disability and visual impairment;
 
d.      To attend to his personal business for a period of four hours on one day each week, being each Saturday between the hours of 12:00pm and 4:00pm or during such other four-hour period on a weekly basis as may be agreed to in advance by his Conditional Sentence Supervisor, and
 
e.      To present at the door of the Crawford Residence should any member of law enforcement attend at same to confirm compliance with the terms of this CSO.
 
76.  The terms of the CSO for its final four months of duration shall be the same as those outlined above but the period of house arrest shall be substituted with a curfew that shall be in effect between the hours of 10:00pm and 6:00am daily. 77.  As for the accompanying Probation Order, which shall follow the term of the CSO, it shall be supervised and for a duration of 24 months, the conditions of which shall be as follows: a.      To keep the peace and be of good behaviour toward Fredericka Lane Crawford, and
 
b.      To attend any treatment or counselling program deemed appropriate by his Probation Officer, having regard to the limitations imposed by his hearing disability and visual impairment. 
 
 
78.  In addition, this Court exercises its discretion to impose a lifetime weapons prohibition on Mr. Crawford pursuant to Section 110 of the Criminal Code, as requested by the Crown. 
79.  That concludes the sentencing decision of this Court. Let me be very clear in warning you Mr. Crawford, that anything short of full compliance with the terms of the CSO and supervised probation order could result in serious consequences for you, including a term of incarceration. Prison is not a place where anyone wants to be let alone an 84-year-old man with a hearing disability and a visual impairment who suffers from declining physical health. I hope that you have learned from your very serious and aberrant actions and I wish both you and Ms. Crawford well going forward.         
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ns/ca/2023nsca3.html
            On June 6, 2019, Mr. Lee was charged with sexual assault contrary to s.271 of the Criminal Code.  His trial was originally scheduled to be heard in the Provincial Court of Nova Scotia on November 16-17, 2020.  Certain matters arose which necessitated an adjournment on the first day of trial.  Two weeks later, new trial dates were assigned for November 29-30 and December 3, 2021.
 
            On November 24, 2021, Mr. Lee succeeded on his application to stay the charge.  The Honourable Judge Ann Marie Simmons (“the judge”) was persuaded the respondent’s s.11(b) Charter right to trial within a reasonable time had been breached.  She determined the trial, scheduled to begin the following week, had exceeded the presumptively reasonable delay ceiling of 18 months prescribed in R. v. Jordan, 2016 SCC 27.  The judge concluded the Crown had not met its burden to rationalize that delay.
 
            The Crown appeals from the stay decision.  It says the judge incorrectly attributed certain periods of the delay in her application of the Jordan analysis to the circumstances of Mr. Lee’s case.  The Crown asks us to quash the stay imposed by the judge and to remit the matter for adjudication on the merits, or in the alternative, to quash the stay and order a new trial.  For the reasons that follow, I would dismiss the appeal.
 
            Understanding the chronology of the various steps in Mr. Lee’s course through the Provincial Court gives context to the judge’s decision.  This requires a closer look at some events, to appreciate the points of divergence between the Crown and Mr. Lee as to their significance.  Certain dates are critical to the Crown’s objections to the judge’s decision.  
 
            There is no dispute that from June 2019 when the Information charging Mr. Lee was laid, through to January 2020 when election was made to Provincial Court and a not guilty plea entered, a total of 7 months, 21 days of delay had accrued.  Mr. Lee’s trial was scheduled for November 16-17, 2020 with a pre-trial conference scheduled for June 26, 2020.  That pre-trial was eventually adjourned to September 30, 2020.
 
            Unbeknownst to the Crown, the complainant returned to her home in South Korea in March 2020, intending to come back to Nova Scotia in September.  However, on September 8th she advised Victims’ Services she would remain in South Korea.  Subsequently, in the fall of 2020 the complainant disclosed to the investigating officer:  (i) additional information in the form of text messages between her and Mr. Lee; (ii) she had received medical treatment relating to memory loss surrounding the events of the alleged sexual assault; and (iii) she had kept a diary.
 
            These events impacted the course of the case over the fall of 2020, contributing to the need to adjourn the trial.  The events were outlined in detail by the judge in her decision and ably captured in a chart found in the Crown’s factum.  A considerable portion of that chart is reproduced here to provide context to the arguments raised by the Crown:
 



 Date 
 Appearance Notes 
 Time Elapsed 




 Oct 6, 2020 
 Crown applies to adjourn the trial as the complainant is out of the country. Crown is aware of Jordan concerns. Defence is opposed, says this issue should have been raised at a pre-trial conference. Adjourned to Oct 9, 2020 for further inquiries.[1] 
 +6 days   (Total: 488 days, or 16 mo) 


 Oct 7, 2020 
 Complainant advises Crown about concerns with appearing in person: 28 day total quarantine, risk of infection during travel, having to advise parents of reason for travel. 
   


 Oct 8, 2020 
 Complainant advises Crown about an in-person course she is taking in South Korea. Crown advises defence it is making a videolink application. 
   


 Oct 9, 2020 
 Crown abandons adjournment application and makes s. 714.2 application. Defence needs instructions to make submissions. Adjourned to Oct 15, 2020. 
 +3 days   (Total: 491 days, or 16 mo, 3 days) 


 Oct 15, 2020 
 Defence submissions on s. 714.2 application. Defence is working with Crown to resolve issue of text message translation. Defence says there may be s. 276 application, but unlikely. Adjourned to Nov 2, 2020 for s. 714.2 application continuation. 
 +6 days   (Total: 497 days, or 16 mo, 9 days) 


 Oct 30, 2020 
 Complainant advises investigating officer (“I/O”) that she is having memory problems and mentions speaking with a psychiatrist. Complainant also forwards to I/O two screenshots of text messages. 
   


 Nov 2, 2020 
 Crown witnesses, complainant and Ms. Kang, testify on s. 714.2 application. Adjourned to Nov 3, 2020 to schedule defence submissions. 
 + 18 days   (Total: 515 days) 


 Nov 3, 2020 
 Defence submissions scheduled for Nov 5, 2020. 
 +1 day   (Total: 516 days) 


 Nov 5, 2020 
 Defence submissions on s. 714.2 application. Defence says “more should have been done earlier”. Adjourned to Nov 12, 2020 for decision on s. 714.2 application. 
 +2 days   (Total: 518 days) 


 Nov 9, 2020 
 Crown meets with complainant with a police officer (not the I/O) and learns of complainant’s memory problems. Complainant also mentions making diary entries. 
   


 Nov 10, 2020 
 Crown advises defence of the complainant’s memory loss. Crown asks I/O if he has had any correspondence with the complainant. At 8:48 p.m., I/O forwards to Crown the complainant’s Oct 30, 2020 email. Crown forwards the 8:48 p.m. email to defence at 8:54 p.m. Defence advises Crown that it possesses texts messages that are not part of the disclosure that it is holding on to as “potential defence evidence”. 
   


 Nov 11, 2020 
 Complainant advises Crown that she has been seeing a psychiatrist for three weeks and will try to restore her memory. Defence reiterates to Crown that it has additional text messages. 
   


 Nov 12, 2020 
 Crown is contemplating a past recollection recorded application, given the complainant’s memory loss. Court invites submissions on whether to proceed with the s. 714.2 decision. Defence says this development makes it even more imperative for complainant to appear in person. Further, defence says that there is more disclosure to request and potential third party records to try to have produced, but does not know if there will be a s. 278.3 application. Matter stood down to allow Court time to decide if she “should give [counsel] the decision”. Court invites possibility of reopening the s. 714.2 application, but parties agree to receive decision. Videolink application granted. Crown shows defence complainant’s Nov 11 email. After court, Crown replies to defence’s disclosure request that I/O has nothing further. 
 +7 days   (Total: 525 days, 17 mo, 7 days) 


 Nov 13, 2020 
 Crown reiterates to defence that it is contemplating a “past recollection recorded” application, with which defence was not familiar. Crown asks if defence is making a s. 278.3 application (re: complainant’s diary) and/or a s. 278.92 application (re: text messages). Defence asks for clarification. Complainant advises Crown she remembers the majority of the incident. Crown discloses same to defence minutes later. 
   


 Nov 14, 2020 
 Defence advises Crown it is making an adjournment application, citing five areas of inquiry it needs to consider further. 
   


 Nov 16, 2020 
 Trial date: defence seeks adjournment because of outstanding issues arising from complainant’s two emails sent since Nov 10. Adjournment granted. Court invites counsel to email their availability to set a new date. Defence estimates three days required for trial. Crown will make itself available for “any date”. Crown advises that, because the trial has been adjourned, it will make a Seaboyer application. Court will look for a half-day for the potential s. 278.3 and Seaboyer applications. Adjourned to Nov 23, 2020 to set new trial date. 
 +4 days   (Total: 529 days, or 17 mo, 11 days) 


 Nov 23, 2020 
 Court notes all parties available for trial: Mar 8, Mar 12, Apr 22, and Apr 23, but court is “fully booked on those days”. Court asks Crown to “look at the dockets” to see if this matter can be given priority on those dates. Adjourned to Dec 1, 2020 to set trial dates. 
 +7 days   (Total: 533 days, or 17 mo, 18 days 


 Dec 1, 2020 
 Crown advises that the four dates discussed present challenges. Crown asks to look at dockets, in other courtrooms, for earlier dates. Court says it is willing to hear this trial any time she is sitting and a courtroom is available. Court offers: Nov 15-17, 2021. Crown available; defence is not available Nov 16, 17. Court schedules Nov 29, Nov 30, Dec 3 for trial. Adjourned to Dec 8, 2020 to see if earlier dates can be scheduled. 
 +8 days   (Total: 541 days, or 17 mo, 26 days) 


 Dec 7, 2020 
 Crown finds potential trials dates: Jan 4, 6, and 25. Defence not available. 
   


 Dec 8, 2020 
 Crown reiterates it will accept any trial dates. Crown has looked for dates in any Halifax courtroom in January when defence is available and located potential dates: Jan 13, 15 (Court not available), 19, 22. Other potential dates Crown found were: Jan 6 and Feb 1, 5, 8, 12, 15, 19, 22, or 26; defence is not available, but Court might have been able to accommodate Feb 5, 8, 9. Jan 25 also a potential date, but Court not available. Crown canvassed with federal and municipal Crowns for court time, will canvass Dartmouth courts, and will look into March and April dockets. Defence to consider whether it is making a s. 278.3 application. Adjourned to Dec 22, 2020 to see if earlier dates can be scheduled. 
 +7 days   (Total: 548 days, or 18 mo, 2 days) 


 Dec 17, 2020 
 Court “may be able to secure some dates” in May 2021. Crown confirms it is available. 
   


 Dec 21, 2020 
 Defence advises Court and Crown that it is “seeking” : (1) the complainant’s diary; (2) the complainant’s medical records; (3) Victim Services records; (4) s. 278.92 application (re: text messages in defence possession); and (5) further texts of Crown witnesses. Defence may make a delay application. 
   


 Dec 22, 2020 
 Crown is not bringing a Seaboyer application and defence may need a hearing for all items identified in yesterday’s correspondence. Crown has located potential dates: Jan 13 (defence available, Court not sitting but could), Jan 15 (defence available, Court not available), Mar 1 (defence not available), Mar 4, Mar 11 (Court not available). Some May dates available, but defence is not available. Court books Jul 12, 2021 for this matter. Adjourned to Jan 19, 2021 for status on any third party records applications. Crown notes that s. 278.3 requires notice and early trial dates may be hard to accommodate. 
 +14 days   (Total: 562 days, or 18 mo, 16 days) 


 Dec 29, 2020 
 Defence asks Crown if it will lead evidence of two incidents, which would alleviate the need for a s. 276 application. 
   


 Jan 11, 2021 
 Court asks if parties available Jul 13. Crown available. 
   


 Jan 13, 2021 
 Defence requests various third party records from Crown: (1) complainant’s diary; (2) Victim Services’ file; (3) any further communications between Crown witnesses; and (4) any further communications between Crown witnesses and accused. Defence requests disclosure of the names of those who helped complainant with her memory, how texts were received by police from Crown witnesses, and any further communication between police and witnesses.  Crown relays relevant requests to complainant. 
   


 Jan 14, 2021 
 Crown replies to defence’s correspondence from Dec 29 and Jan 13, providing further information on s. 278.92 and efforts to obtain waivers from the complainant. 
   


 Jan 15, 2021 
 Complainant sends Crown her Medical Certificate and diary entry, in Korean. Complainant has no further texts and confirms the typed copy of her diary is the original.  Crown advises defence it is in possession of this medical record and the diary entry, and is working on obtaining a waiver to produce these documents to defence. 
   


 Jan 18, 2021 
 Complainant confirms to Crown that what she has sent is all the medical documentation she has received.  Crown obtains waiver from complainant to produce to defence, and for Crown to use, her medical record and diary. 
   


 Jan 19, 2021 
 Five issues discussed: (1) Defence may make s. 276 application. (2) Crown has the complainant’s diary and medical record, as well as a waiver; awaiting translation and then documents can be produced to defence. (3) Defence needs to make a s. 278.3 application (re: Victim Services’ file). (4) Defence wants to use Jul 12 for a motion for directions to determine if text messages in its possession are records pursuant to s. 278.1. (5) Defence has requested that Crown find out how police obtained text messages, as it may result in “something during the trial”; this is an issue defence encountered before. Crown has no further information to provide. Adjourned to Mar 4, 2021 for update on what pre-trial applications will be pursued. Out of court, Crown queries with provincial Crowns whether they are aware of any potential court time. Court time appears available: Feb 8, Feb 12, Feb 19, Mar 4, Mar 12, and Mar 19. 
 +28 days   (Total: 590 days, or 19 mo, 13 days) 


 Jan 28, 2021 
 Crown asks if defence available for Apr 29 as it appears to have become available. 
   


 Feb 1, 2021 
 Crown provides defence with Korean and English translations of the complainant’s diary and Medical Certificate of Jan 2021. Defence is not available Apr 29. 
   


 Feb 2, 2021 
 Crown writes to Court that Mar 23, 2021 may be available. Defence is not available. 
   


 Feb 11, 2021 
 Court writes to Crown that the Court is not available for Mar 23, but Apr 26-30 may open up. Jul 13 is offered again. Crown is available, defence is not. 
   


 Mar 4, 2021 
 Defence is pursuing: (1) a s. 276 application as it is “particularly relevant”, (2) a s. 278.3 application (re: Victim Services’ records), and (3) a motion for directions. Defence raises whether there is further disclosure of text messages and the authenticity of the diary and medical certificate. Crown advises it has nothing further to disclose; all other issues require an application. Adjourned to Mar 25, 2021 to set dates. 
 +44 days   (Total: 634 days, or 20 mo, 28 days) 


 Mar 18, 2021 
 Defence advises Court it is no longer pursuing s. 276 or s. 278.3 (re: Victim Services’ records) applications. 
   


 Mar 23, 2021 
 Defence sends a letter to Court raising Jordan issue. 
   


 Mar 25, 2021 
 Defence confirms no s. 276 or s. 278.3 (re: Victim Services’ records) applications needed. Defence needs more time to consider whether it is making a s. 278.3 application (re: complainant’s medical records). Defence still pursuing the motion for directions. Adjourned to Apr 15, 2021 to see if defence has any further issues to raise, including Jordan, and to set motion for directions date. Crown has arranged for independent legal advice for the complainant to obtain a waiver permitting use of the text messages that were provided in the disclosure. 
 +21 days   (Total: 655 days, or 21 mo, 19 days) 


 Apr 15, 2021 
 Four issues discussed: (1) Motion for directions procedure and hearing date scheduled. (2) Defence may make s. 278.3 application (re: complainant’s medical records). (3) Defence asks if there are more diary entries because it “believes” there may be more. Crown does not have more to disclose, but will confirm there are no other entries about this incident. If defence is not satisfied, it must bring an application for production. (4) Defence will file a delay application. Adjourned to May 4, 2021 for motion for directions. 
 +21 days   (Total: 676 days, or 22 mo, 9 days) 


 Apr 27, 2021 
 Court writes to multiple counsel offering: Aug 3-6, 9, 10, 12 and “a time period between September 7th and October 1”. Crown is available, defence is not. 
   


 Apr 29, 2021 
 Defence advises Court about three items: (1) possible defence memory expert; (2) defence is preparing a s. 278.3 application (re: complainant’s medical records); and (3) defence is pursuing a Jordan application. 
   


 May 3, 2021 
 Defence advises Court and Crown they will not be ready to proceed tomorrow. 
   


 May 4, 2021 
 Four issues discussed: (1) Motion for directions adjourned at defence request. (2) Crown will use the complainant’s texts from the disclosure, so no s. 278.92 application required. (3) Parties agree to use Jul 12 for the s. 278.3 application (re: complainant’s medical file). Crown will facilitate obtaining counsel for complainant. (4) Transcript has been prepared for the delay application. If defence chooses to bring application before trial, then Court wants to use Jul 12 for the delay argument. Defence needs instructions to decide. Adjourned to May 18 for motion for directions. 
 +19 days   (Total: 695 days, or 22 mo, 28 days) 


 May 14, 2021 
 Complainant emails Crown second medical record from May 2021. 
   


 May 18, 2021 
 Motion for directions hearing. Adjourned to Jun 29, 2021 for decision. 
 +14 days   (Total: 709 days) 


 May 25, 2021 
 Crown discloses translated medical record provided by the complainant on May 14 and advises a waiver has been obtained regarding text messages. 
   


 Jun 29, 2021 
 Decision on motion for directions. Two groups of texts are “records”. Adjourned to Jul 9, 2021 to set date for s. 278.93 hearing. 
 +42 days   (Total: 751 days) 


 Jul 8, 2021 
 Defence files its delay application. 
   


 Jul 9, 2021 
 Three issues discussed: (1) Crown has obtained waivers for all messages in defence’s possession, so no s. 278.92 application (re: text messages) is required. (2) Defence is looking at a Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty (“MLAT”) for enforcement of any s. 278.3 order (re: complainant’s medical file) and will not be able to deal with this issue on Jul 12. (3) Delay application – Crown on vacation first three weeks of August. Adjourned to Sep 16 for delay argument. Nothing to proceed on Jul 12. 
 +10 days   (Total: 761 days, or 25 mo, 3 days 


 Aug 6, 2021 
 Defence writes Crown to see whether PPS will act as requesting party on MLAT, if defence makes a s. 278.3 application (re: complainant’s medical records). 
   


 Aug 31, 2021 
 Defence advises Court of intention to rely on MLAT. 
   


 Sep 15, 2021 
 Defence advises they are not available for tomorrow due to illness and the delay application is incomplete. 
   


 Sep 16, 2021 
 Delay argument adjourned at defence request. Crown received a third medical record (eight-page therapeutic record) from the complainant on Sep 15, 2021. Adjourned to Sep 23, 2021 for status update. 
 +69 days   (Total: 830 days, or 27 mo, 11 days) 


 Sep 23, 2021 
 Parties to set dates for delay and s. 278.3 (re: eight-page therapeutic record) applications. Crown has arranged for complainant to have counsel for the anticipated production application. Adjourned to Nov 2, 2021 for delay argument and to Oct 1, 2021 to set s. 278.4 hearing. 
 +7 days   (Total: 837 days, or 27 mo, 18 days) 


 Sep 29, 2021 
 Defence files s. 278.3 application (re: eight-page therapeutic record). 
   


 Oct 1, 2021 
 To set dates for s. 278.4 hearing: Court has to check with Chief Judge if there is a courtroom and staff available for potential dates discussed by email before this appearance. Adjourned to Oct 7, 2021 to set dates. 
 +8 days (Total: 845 days, or 27 mo, 26 days) 


 Oct 7, 2021 
 Adjourned to Nov 10, 2021 for s. 278.4 hearing. 
 +6 days   (Total: 851 days) 


 Oct 29, 2021 
 Defence files outstanding transcripts for delay argument. 
   


 Nov 2, 2021 
 Delay argument. Adjourned to Nov 10 to set a date for decision and for s. 278.4 hearing. 
 +26 days   (Total: 877 days) 


 Nov 10, 2021 
 Section 278.4 hearing (re: eight-page therapeutic record). Adjourned to Nov 18, 2021 for decision. Court tentatively offers Nov 24 for decision on delay. 
 + 8 days   (Total: 885 days) 


 Nov 18, 2021 
 Section 278.5 decision: production to Court ordered. Parties have no further submissions for s. 278.7. Adjourned to Nov 24, 2021 for s. 278.7 decision. 
 +8 days   (Total: 893 days) 


 Nov 24, 2021 
 Decision on s. 11(b) application. Stay of proceedings entered. 
 +6 days   (Total: 899 days) 



 
            The judge’s calculations of the total delay accrued to the anticipated end of trial was 29 months and 27 days.  Of that delay, two months were attributed to pandemic-related scheduling challenges and four months were attributed to defence unavailability.  The net delay was therefore 24 months. The Crown was not able to persuade the judge that exceptional circumstances existed to bring that delay below the 18 month ceiling.
 
            The applicable standard of review was described by Derrick, J.A. in R. v. Pearce, 2021 NSCA 37:
 
   The standard of review for s. 11(b) appeals is a three-step process as this Court has stated previously: palpable and overriding error for findings of fact and the categorization or attribution of delay, and correctness for the allocation or characterization of the delay and the ultimate determination of whether the delay was unreasonable and warrants a judicial stay. Deference is owed to a trial judge’s assessment of responsibility for the delay because it involves findings of fact.
 
     Appellate courts must show deference to a trial judge’s underlying findings of fact and to the judge’s determination of the legitimacy of defence conduct. Those decisions are “by no means an exact science” and “first instance judges are uniquely positioned to gauge” whether the defence actions were legitimately taken to respond to the charges (Jordan, at para. 65; Cody, at paras. 31-32).
 
     Trial judges dealing with s. 11(b) applications will be required to make underlying findings of fact and/or draw inferences from facts in determining what happened in the course of the case. Trial judges must also determine what caused the delay – was the defence conduct legitimate and not frivolous, was the case complex, had the parties reasonably relied on the law as it was before Jordan. As this Court noted in R. v. Brown, 2018 NSCA 62, at para. 46, and R. v. Ellis, 2020 NSCA 78, at para. 80, the trial judge’s categorization of the delay – the finding of who or what caused the delay – is entitled to deference, subject to palpable and overriding error.
 
     A trial judge’s allocation of the delay under the Jordan framework, also referred to as the characterization of the delay, which includes calculating the total delay, subtracting the delay assessed against the defence, and then comparing the net delay to the applicable Jordan ceiling, is subject to a standard of correctness. Also subject to a standard of correctness is the judge’s ultimate determination of whether the delay was unreasonable and violated s. 11(b).
 
     The above accords with the Supreme Court of Canada’s recent statement in R. v. Yusuf, 2021 SCC 2, that the Ontario Court of Appeal, in the decision being appealed from (cited as R. v. Pauls, 2020 ONCA 220), had “applied the appropriate standard of review. In Pauls, the standard of review was described:
 
     ...Deference is owed to a trial judge's underlying findings of fact. Characterizations of periods of delay and the ultimate decision concerning whether there has been unreasonable delay are reviewable on a standard of correctness (cites omitted).
 
See also R. v. Pastuch, 2022 SKCA 109 at paras. 141-42; 146.
 
        The judge applied the analytical framework found in Jordan to determine whether the delay in Mr. Lee’s case was unreasonable.  Jordan set ceilings beyond which delay in a criminal proceeding will be presumptively unreasonable.  In the case of provincial court matters, the Supreme Court of Canada set the limit at 18 months, net of any delay attributable to or waived by the defence.  (In superior court matters that ceiling is 30 months.)  Once the delay has been calculated, if the ceiling is exceeded the burden falls to the Crown to justify the delay on the basis of exceptional circumstances.
 
        A year after Jordan, in R. v. Cody, 2017 SCC 31, clarification was provided regarding assessment of defence delay and the obligations of all three parties to the case - Crown, defence and the court.  This evolution of the Jordan framework was also discussed in Pearce: 
 
      The Supreme Court of Canada in Cody recognized there is a “potential tension between the right to make full answer and defence and the right to be tried within a reasonable time – and the need to balance both…” (at para. 34). Actions taken by defence in the course of the trial will be scrutinized on a s. 11(b) application to determine whether they were legitimately taken to respond to the charges or designed to delay. Furthermore, defence actions that exhibit “marked inefficiency or marked indifference toward delay” may well be counted against the defence in a s. 11(b) analysis (Cody, at para. 32).
 
     Defence counsel have a responsibility to safeguard their client’s s. 11(b) rights by “actively advancing their right to a trial within a reasonable time, collaborating with the Crown when appropriate, and using court time efficiently” (R. v. Potter, 2020 NSCA 9, at para. 271, citing Cody, at para. 33 and Jordan, at para. 138).
 
     Not only defence but all participants in the criminal justice system have been directed by Jordan to coordinate efforts to achieve “reasonably prompt justice, with a view to fulfilling s. 11(b)’s important objectives” (at para. 5). Trial judges as well as counsel have an obligation to conduct the proceedings efficiently and proactively in order to ensure unreasonable delay is avoided.
 
        The Crown asserts the judge misapplied the test in relation to “exceptional circumstances” and wrongly assessed defence delay.  The Crown says the combination of both exceptional circumstances, and defence delay occasioned after November 2020, were not properly excised from the judge’s calculation.
 
        Mr. Lee maintains the judge’s characterizations of the delay and her calculations flowing therefrom were correct.  He suggests that even if there were errors on the part of the judge, it does not mean the overall delay would amount to less than 18 months.
 
        The Crown raises two issues:
 
i)                   Did the judge err in law or in fact in failing to allocate delay to exceptional circumstances?
 
ii)                Did the judge err in law or in fact in allocating defence delay?
 
        Her decision, delivered orally, reflects the judge understood the task before her:
 
     The Supreme Court of Canada established a presumptive ceiling of 18 months for matters tried in the Provincial Court. Delays past this ceiling is presumptively unreasonable. The calculation begins with the date of the charge, and ends with the actual or anticipated end of the trial. I am directed to consider whether there is any period of time which should be categorized as Defence delay, where delay has been waived by the Defence , or solely caused by the conduct of the Defence. The accumulative amount of delay is deducted from the total period of delay. If the remaining calculations falls above the presumptive ceiling; the Crown must show the presence of exceptional circumstances in order to justify the delay. A failure to do so will take me to the conclusion that a stay is warranted.
 
     What amounts to exceptional circumstances which might justify delay is defined as circumstances of such nature that they lie outside the Crown' s control to being reasonably unforeseen or reasonably unavoidable, and the Crown cannot reasonably remedy the delays arising therefrom. Exceptional circumstances may include discrete events and/or the complexity of the case.
 
     The Supreme Court of Canada was clear. The presence of exceptional circumstances is the only basis upon which the Crown can discharge its burden to justify as a way that exceeds the ceiling.
 
     The Supreme Court of Canada reiterated this approach to assess and [sic] post charge delay in R. v. Cody in 2017. To rebut the presumption that delay is unreasonable, the Crown must establish the presence of exceptional circumstances defined as either discrete events, or a particular [sic] complex case.
 
     The Court recognized that discrete events result in quantitative deductions of particular periods of time. On the other hand, case complexity requires a qualitative assessment.
 
     In Cody, the Court also provided guidance in relation to Defence waiver and the import of the conduct of the Defence throughout the proceedings. Defence waiver can be either explicit or implicit so long as it is informed, clear, and unequivocal. Defence actions that legitimately take and to [sic] respond to the charges are not deductible, but clearly an accused is not entitled to benefit from their own delay-causing action or inaction.
 
Exceptional circumstances
 
        The judge was required to determine whether there were discrete events that could be characterized as exceptional, and therefore out of the Crown’s control.  In particular, the focus was on the issues involving the complainant that arose after Mr. Lee’s trial was first set for November 2020.
 
        Jordan instructed judges that exceptional circumstances outside the Crown’s control are those that “are reasonably unforeseen or reasonably unavoidable” and for which “Crown counsel cannot reasonably remedy the delays” arising therefrom (para. 69).
 
        The Crown says the judge overlooked the distinction between allocation of delay and attribution of delay, which eventually led to a failure to properly characterize certain delays as constituting exceptional circumstances.  The Crown relies on R. v. Virk, 2021 BCCA 58, where that distinction was drawn:
 
     The errors identified in both S.C.W. and Pipping concerned attribution of delay, that is, what or who caused a period of delay. When a judge determines what caused a delay or whether steps were taken with the intention of delaying proceedings and was thus illegitimate, the judge is making a finding of fact or drawing an inference. This attribution of responsibility is therefore owed deference on appeal. Allocation is distinct from attribution. Allocation involves the application of legal principles to the facts found concerning the cause of delay, in order to categorize the period of delay within the Jordan or Morin framework. Attribution (deciding who or what caused a delay) will often effectively determine allocation (under Jordan whether that delay will be deducted), but that is not always so. They are distinct steps, and different standards of review apply to each step.
 
     The distinction between attribution and allocation can be demonstrated by way of example. If a judge were to find that defence counsel caused a period of delay by not being available to set trial dates when both the Crown and court were, that is a finding of fact to which deference is owed. But if the judge were, at that point, to decide that the resulting delay should not be allocated to defence delay because defence counsel cannot be expected always to be available, that would be an error of law. There is an established principle that such delay is to be allocated to defence delay: Jordan at para. 64.
 
        The Crown says, and I agree, the attribution of the delay caused by an adjournment is not always limited simply to which party requested it.  In this case, there were several reasons for the adjournment of the November 2020 trial date.  The Crown says some of those relate to the actions or inactions of the defence and some relate to institutional delay on the part of the court.  I would add as well that as her decision reflects, the judge was of the view the Crown also bore some responsibility in relation to that adjournment.
 
        The Crown correctly asserts the judge was required to consider whether the circumstances were unavoidable or unreasonable, but not both.  It points to the judge’s analysis of exceptional circumstances and her use of the phrase “reasonably unavoidable” with the phrase “reasonably unforeseen”.  The Crown says the linking of the two concepts constitutes error on the judge’s part.  It says once the judge determined something was unforeseen, she did not then need to consider whether it was unavoidable, and should have instead proceeded to the second step of the analysis.  Specifically, once the judge found the adjournment of the November 2020 trial was reasonably unforeseen due to the victim’s memory difficulties, she did not need to then consider also the question of whether that delay was unavoidable.
 
        The judge was thorough in her rejection of the Crown’s submissions as to exceptional circumstances:
 
   I am confident that if the Crown knew in June that the complainant was in Korea, immediate action would've been taken. And in the context of the emerging pandemic it was imperative for the Crown to become aware of the true state of the prosecution, and failing to do so put the prosecution on the path that led to the trial being adjourned on the date scheduled to commence. 
 
   I am not satisfied that the problem was unavoidable. Unexpected, yes, but not unavoidable. Had the Crown made contact with the complainant before mid to late September, the events of October and November described above may not have occurred. 
 
   So, for these reasons I disagree with the proposition that on November 16, 2020 the Crown was prepared to proceed. In my view it cannot be said that the Court would've permitted the complainant to testify by video given the very significant change in circumstances.
 
…
 
   In terms of whether the memory issue was unexpected, and whether this could be seen as an exceptional circumstance justifying the delay in this case, it is fair to say that the Crown would not be expected to anticipate this very serious memory problem reported in the October 30th email to the officer in charge.
 
   As I have explained, what happened here had two components. The complainant was not resident in Canada, and she experienced a serious problem with her memory of the incident. As above, had the Crown made contact with the complainant earlier, the fact that she was in Korea could've been addressed early on.  Earlier contact with the complainant may have well brought the memory issues to the forefront much earlier, as I have described above. Accordingly, the problems could've been mitigated and were not truly unavoidable.
 
   The problem with respect to the memory was unforeseeable, but that begs the question of when the Crown could have or should have become aware of the problem. The example given by the majority in Jordan is not analogous to this case. A witness who unexpectedly recants while testifying is a reference to a witness who was not expected to recant prior to the start of the trial. It suggests [sic] prior contact with and preparation of the witness in advance of the trial leading to the unexpected result that the witness recants at trial.
 
…
 
   In sum I return to Jordan in [sic] the Supreme Court of Canada's direction that discrete exceptional events which are reasonably unforeseeable or reasonably unavoidable are to be deducted from the delay period to the extent that they cannot be reasonably mitigated by the Prosecution or the justice system. If they can be mitigated but are not, then that portion is not deducted from the delay.
 
   I am not persuaded to find that the discrete event at issue here was reasonably unavoidable or reasonably unforeseen as I have discussed. Accordingly the delay occasioned by the trial being adjourned should not be deducted from delay in my view.
 
(underlined emphasis added)
 
        The judge’s reasons make it clear she was not requiring that she be satisfied of both the unforeseen and the unavoidable nature of the events she determined factored into the adjournment of the trial in November 2020.  The Crown has not persuaded me there is any error in this regard.
 
        The Crown also maintains the memory difficulties of the complainant and the complainant’s decision to disclose screenshot materials in the fall of 2020 were sources of delay outside the Crown’s control, and therefore should also have been characterized by the judge as exceptional circumstances.  The Crown says it was impossible to predict the defence would want to explore the complainant’s disclosure of screenshot messages or make a motion concerning them. With respect, it is difficult to imagine it could have come as any surprise to the Crown that the defence, when it learned about additional disclosure, wanted to explore its implications. 
 
        The Crown also says it had no capacity to control disclosure of which it was unaware until the complainant provided it.  Likewise, it suggests, had the complainant never raised her memory problems, which nonetheless eventually resolved, the Crown might never have known about that difficulty.  While I do not disagree, it is apparent from the judge’s decision she interpreted the Crown’s lack of attention to the complainant, and to the case overall, at an earlier point in the timeline as contributing in a significant way to the delay caused by those developments.
 
        Mr. Lee says there were a variety of events, in addition to those the Crown now raises, which culminated in the November 2020 adjournment.  He says the Crown was trying to “salvage” a case to which it had not been paying attention, as illustrated in the Crown’s October 6th application for an adjournment, which was abandoned three days later.  Mr. Lee describes that issues began to “snowball” shortly prior to the November 2020 trial date.  He rejects the suggestion there was any discrete event that caused the delay, because once the complainant’s memory issues arose, there were still efforts to have the trial proceed, although by the week of November 10th, it seemed unlikely that would be possible.
 
        The Crown asks us to consider whether the judge improperly assumed that had the Crown tended to matters within its control at an earlier time, things may not have unfolded the way they did.  It was open to the judge to view the Crown’s responsibility in the continuum of events as she did.  Her conclusion does not constitute error, even though the Crown would have preferred a different outcome.
 
        The Crown’s argument would seem to imply it was the complainant’s obligation to reveal the existence of additional materials to the police, thereby absolving the Crown of responsibility, and thus constituting exceptional circumstances.  This begs the question as to how the complainant would have been in a position to determine what might be relevant to the police or the Crown in their prosecution of the case?  The suggestion the Crown does not bear responsibility for that aspect of the delay was not persuasive to the judge.  In her analysis the judge was clear as to why she was attributing certain delay to the Crown, rather than concluding exceptional circumstances were in play.  I see no error in the judge having found as she did.
 
        At step two of the analysis, the judge was required to look at the Crown’s conduct once the issues that necessitated the adjournment arose, and its efforts to ameliorate any delay.  The Crown says it took several “vigorous” steps, such as looking for available dates on multiple court dockets to target the earliest time to continue the matter, and securing translation of certain disclosure.  It says those steps should have been considered by the judge and had she done so, those aspects of the delay would have been properly excised from the total delay.
 
        Her decision reflects the judge did indeed recognize the Crown’s efforts:
 
     As soon as the first trial date was adjourned, the Crown and the Court made efforts to find earlier dates for trial. I asked what did the Crown do?
 
     […] The Crown's efforts to secure earlier court dates were meaningful. Ms. Ball clearly worked hard to review dockets , speak with colleagues in the hopes of coming up with alternate trial time and I commend her efforts.
 
   The reality is that these efforts did not result in identifying dates that could actually be offered to the Defence.  […] To be clear, Ms. Ball ' s efforts were laudable but unfortunately no earlier dates could be secured.
 
…
 
   After the November 2020 adjournment , the Defence also raised the possibility of applications to obtain the newly disclosed diary and medical records. Sorry, in existence of - disclosed the existence of a diary and some further medical records. The applications were never needed, in fact, as the Crown facilitated obtaining the third party records with waiver. I note
except, of course, for the records created in January of 2021, but their existence not disclosed to the Crown until September of 2021. The issues raised in November of 2020 have all been resolved at this point in time. They will not cause delay in starting the trial on November 29, 2021.
 
…
 
   To be clear, there is no suggestion that any of the above applications were frivolous. In fact the Crown obtained and disclosed the diary and two of the three medical records by way of waiver. The motion for directions resulted in a ruling that some of the text messages would be subject to the 278.3 legislation, and they, too, were produced by waiver by the Crown by way of waiver. [sic]
 
…
 
   As above, the Crown did make valiant efforts to assist in the search for trial dates earlier than November 29th of 2021. The Crown explored avenues available to the Crown and not to the Court to ask her colleagues directly whether sufficient time might become available in order to schedule this trial at an earlier time. And further, Crown Counsel made prompt arrangements to have independent counsel appointed for the complainant so that issues involving the text messages and medical records could be resolved in a timely - were resolved in a timely fashion.
 
        I am not persuaded the judge erred in either her categorization or attribution of delay. Nor do I see any error with respect to her allocation of delay.  Her reasons make clear why the judge concluded certain delay was attributable to the Crown rather than being characterized as exceptional circumstances.  I would dismiss this ground of appeal.
 
Defence delay
 
        Cody recognized the assessment of defence conduct is a “highly discretionary” task rather than an “exact science”, one for which the application judge is best suited (para. 31).  As the Crown reminds us, Cody also recognized the tension between the right to make full answer and defence and the right to a timely trial.  In oral submissions the Crown suggested the Supreme Court of Canada was prepared to have that tension exist in light of the burden on the defence to be proactive in its conduct of the case.  That burden was recently reiterated by the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Boulanger, 2022 SCC 2:
 
       […] it is not sufficient that the step taken by the respondent be legitimate for the delay not to be attributable to him. In this case, it is the manner in which the defence conducted itself with respect to its motion for an unredacted copy of the information that was illegitimate, particularly because of how late the motion was brought. […]
 
See also R. v. Lai, 2021 SCC 52 at para 1; R. v. King, 2018 NLCA 66 at para. 165.
 
        The Crown points to several aspects of the path of Mr. Lee’s case which led to delay that it says should properly have been attributed to the defence.  The first is in relation to the need for the defence to consider, at the time of the November 2020 adjournment, whether it wished to advance any application upon learning the complainant had suffered serious difficulties with her memory in the months prior to the intended trial date.  The Crown says it was up to the defence to pursue any application it wished and therefore any delay in that respect should properly have fallen to the defence, as no application was eventually needed because the complainant recovered her memory.  The Crown also points to the availability of trial dates in February and March 2021 that could not be utilized because the defence’s decision about whether to make an application still had not been made.
 
        At the time of the November 20, 2020 adjournment the defence also wished to explore the possibility of additional disclosure in the form of text messages of the complainant.  The Crown says this delay too should have fallen to the defence, because the Crown re-iterated several times in the period between the November adjournment and March 4, 2021, that it did not have any such further disclosure.
 
        The Crown raises as another factor the defence’s conduct concerning a possible s.278.9 application for medical records.  Such an application was being contemplated in November 2020, but had not been filed.  The Crown says it ameliorated any further delay by securing a waiver from the complainant so the materials could be used at trial, thereby precluding the need for the application.
 
        The Crown raises both defence and the court’s obligations, within the Jordan framework, to be proactive in avoiding delay.  The Crown asks us to consider the details regarding identification of possible adjourned trial dates.  It points to the following as problematic:
 
•                    During the discussion of dates that might be available, the judge did not provide the first available dates; instead she asked counsel when they would next be available to continue the matter.
 
•                    There were earlier dates which the Court could not use because the defence was not available or was still contemplating possible applications.  The Crown says the judge did not properly account for all of the delay occasioned by the defence, looking only at the period from August to December 2021, despite there being other times that “should probably have been considered” but were not.
 
•                    The judge only looked at dates in her own courtroom.  The Crown maintains this illustrates a system of centralized scheduling is needed in the Provincial Court to avoid gaps in seizing available court time.[2]
 
        Mr. Lee says the judge’s decision recognized, properly assessed and assigned the delay.  He asserts it is unfair to assume the defence was “doing nothing”, especially in light of the additional factor of the court’s availability.  While Mr. Lee agrees some delay was properly attributable to him, which the judge recognized and accounted for, he rejects the suggestion all of the delay would properly rest with him.  I agree.
 
        Finally, the Crown complains the judge improperly speculated in considering what might have happened had the Crown reached out to the complainant before September 2020.  In my view, engaging in Jordan calculations may, in some circumstances, make inevitable some degree of speculation because the very task of the judge is to look back on a chronology of events that have already unfolded, to reflect both on their significance and their impact on the process, and the resultant calculation of delay.  The judge recognized the highly contextual circumstances of each case when the Jordan ceiling has been exceeded:
 
   The right to be tried within a reasonable time is easy to state and understand: people charged with offences should be tried within a reasonable time. Determining whether the right has been breached in a specific case, however, may be far from straightforward. The right is by its very nature fact-sensitive and case-specific. There are several reasons for this.
 
   First, the term “delay” is not entirely apt. While delay has a pejorative connotation, delay, in the sense of the passage of time, is inherent in any legal proceeding. In fact, some delay may be desirable. As stated by Lamer J., dissenting but not on this point, with Dickson C.J. concurring, undue haste itself can make a trial unfair: see Mills, at p. 941. Therefore, delay only becomes problematic when it is unreasonable.
 
   Second, unreasonableness is not conducive to being captured by a set of rules: a reasonable time for the disposition of one case may be entirely unreasonable for another. Reasonableness is an inherently contextual concept, the application of which depends on the particular circumstances of each case. This makes it difficult and in fact unwise to try to establish the reasonable time requirements of a case by a numerical guideline. Inevitably, the ceiling will be too high for some cases and too low for others. More fundamentally, a fixed guideline is inconsistent with the notion of reasonableness in the context of the infinitely varied situations that arise in real cases.
 
   Third, the Charter protects only against state action. Even if a case took too long to be dealt with, there will only be a breach of the right if that unreasonable delay counts against the state. And so it follows that the focus is not on unreasonable delay in general, but on unreasonable delay that properly counts against the state. We must therefore attribute responsibility for the delay that has occurred and only factor in the delay which can fairly be counted against the state in deciding whether the Charter right has been infringed.
 
        I would dismiss the Crown’s second ground of appeal regarding allocation of defence delay.  The Crown did not persuade the judge there should be allocation of delay to the defence that would have led her to dismiss the stay application.  Nor am I persuaded the judge erred in her conclusions such that all of the delay in this case would properly belong on the defence ledger.
 
        In conclusion, the judge articulated the applicable test, applied it to the circumstances before her, and reached a set of conclusions which, absent error, are entitled to deference.
 
        I would dismiss the appeal.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ns/ca/2023nsca2.html
            The appellants applied for “a stay of convictions” pending the outcome of their applications for leave to appeal.  Despite the Crown’s offered consent to the proposed stay, I denied the applications with reasons to follow.  These are my reasons.  
BACKGROUND
            Mr. Ankur and Mr. Chandran are both relatively young men.  Both came to Canada to study.  Both now work in Canada as Foreign Nationals pursuant to work permits.  
            Unfortunately, both appellants committed Criminal Code offences.  Mr. Ankur was charged in February 2018 with damage to property (s. 430(4) of the Criminal Code) and operating or having the care or control of a motor vehicle with a blood alcohol level greater than 80 mg per 100 ml of blood (s. 253(1)(b)), and impaired care or control of a motor vehicle (s. 253(1)(a)).  On May 6, 2019, he pled guilty to the s. 430(4) offence and on July 17, 2020, to the s. 253(1)(b) offence.  
            At his sentence hearing before Simmons Prov. Ct. J., Mr. Ankur argued the imposition of the mandatory minimum sentence of a $1,000.00 fine would constitute cruel and unusual punishment contrary to s. 12 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  In support, he called expert opinion evidence to the effect that if a criminal conviction were to be entered, a report to the Minister of Immigration triggered a 95 percent probability of removal from Canada.  
            Due to the immigration consequences, the provincial court judge decided that the imposition of the mandatory minimum fine would result in a grossly disproportionate sentence to the one she would otherwise conclude is a fit sentence.  She declined to impose the mandatory minimum.  
            Instead, she granted Mr. Ankur a conditional discharge.  Specifically, she placed him on probation for three years with a variety of conditions, including 100 hours of community service.  If he successfully complied with those conditions, he would be discharged.  Although guilty of the offence, no criminal conviction was entered.  There would be no threat of removal by the immigration authorities.  
            Mr. Chandran’s offence occurred on August 17, 2019.  The police approached him in his car at 2:23 a.m.  Indicia of impairment lead to a breathalyzer demand.  He became belligerent and refused several times.  
            Parliament amended the Criminal Code’s impaired driving provisions.  The police charged Mr. Chandran under the new regime with impaired operation (s. 320.14(1)(a)) and refusing a breathalyzer demand (s. 320.15(1)).  
            Mr. Chandran pled not guilty.  On the date set for trial, December 3, 2020, he pled guilty to the charge of impaired operation (which by definition, includes care or control) of a conveyance.  Judge Amy Sakalauskas ordered a Pre-Sentence Report.  The sentence hearing proceeded before Cromwell Prov. Ct. J., as she then was, on May 21, 2021.  
        As in the Ankur proceedings, the appellant asked the judge for a constitutional exemption from the imposition of the mandatory minimum penalty of a $1,000.00 fine on the basis it would amount to cruel and unusual punishment and hence contrary to s. 12 of the Charter.  
        The sentence hearing was adjourned from time to time.  On October 28, 2021, Judge Cromwell delivered her oral decision.  It is unreported.  In it, she canvassed other Nova Scotia Provincial Court decisions that had wrestled with the notion that imposition of the mandatory minimum fine due to immigration consequences amounted to cruel and unusual punishment (R. v. Tebay, 2020 NSPC 43; R. v. Cummings, 2021 NSPC 28; and R. v. Ankur, unreported).
        I will refer to her analysis in more detail later.  For now, it is sufficient to observe the sentencing judge reasoned that absent the mandatory minimum fine, a conditional discharge would be an appropriate sentence and the collateral immigration consequences would constitute cruel and unusual punishment. 
        As Judge Simmons did in Ankur, Judge Cromwell placed Mr. Chandran on probation for three years with a variety of conditions, including the performance of 100 hours of community service.  Should he successfully complete the terms of his probation order, a discharge would follow. 
 
 
THE SCAC PROCEEDINGS 
        The Crown appealed both decisions as of right to the Summary Conviction Appeal Court.  Justice Denise Boudreau, in light of the identical issues raised, heard the two appeals together on May 2, 2022.  
        The Crown advanced the same two grounds of appeal: 
1.         The Provincial Court Judge erred in law in ruling that the mandatory minimum sentence prescribed by s. 320.19 of the Criminal Code constitutes a violation of s. 12 of the Charter.
2.         The Provincial Court Judge erred in principle in determining that the appropriate sentence was a conditional discharge.[1]
        On August 17, 2022, the SCAC judge delivered separate oral reasons that addressed each appeal.  These were later released in writing.  For Mr. Chandran, they are reported as 2022 NSSC 250, and for Mr. Ankur as 2022 NSSC 251.
        Apart from the different evidentiary record and some factual variations canvassed by Boudreau J., the judge’s legal reasoning followed the same path: the judges committed legal error when they concluded the mandatory minimum constituted cruel and unusual punishment; and they erred when they granted the appellants conditional discharges.
        Later, I will add further details of Boudreau J.’s reasons.
        The appellants filed a joint general Notice of Appeal to this Court (C.A.C. No. 517706) on September 12, 2022.  
        Originally, Boudreau J. had remitted both proceedings back to the Provincial Court for the imposition of sentence.  Justice Boudreau was then convinced it was the SCAC that must impose sentence.  Arrangements were made for the appellants to appear before her on December 14, 2022.  
        The Crown took the same position before Boudreau J. for each appellant: imposition of the mandatory minimum penalty of a $1,000.00 fine.  The required one-year prohibition orders had already been imposed in Provincial Court.  Accordingly, on December 14, 2022, Justice Boudreau fined each appellant $1,000.00.  
 THE APPEAL PROCEEDINGS TO THIS COURT
        As noted above, on September 12, 2022, the appellants filed a general joint Notice of Appeal to this Court.  The grounds of appeal advanced are:
1.         The learned Summary Conviction Court of Appeal judge erred in overturning decisions from the courts below that Conditional Discharges were not fit and proper sentences absent the mandatory minima set out at statute.
2.         The learned Summary Conviction Appeal Court of Appeal judge erred in overturning decisions from the courts below finding that said mandatory minima do not breach s.12 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
        There are two problems with the Notice of Appeal.  First, neither appellant has a right to appeal to this Court.  They need to seek leave to appeal.  Hence, the general Notice of Appeal was not appropriate.  
        The appellants did correctly identify in the Notice that they seek leave to appeal pursuant to s. 839 of the Criminal Code. 
         Second, there were two separate proceedings in Provincial Court and in the SCAC.  There must be two separate applications for leave to appeal.  No doubt the applications for leave to appeal will be heard together.  
        The appellants filed An Amended Notice of Application for Leave to Appeal dated December 9, 2022.  It addresses a number of typographical and spelling issues and is the correct form to prosecute leave to appeal from the SCAC.  The Crown offers its consent to the Amended Notice.  
        I have directed the Registrar to accept the Amended Notice of Application for Leave to Appeal but to assign a second C.A.C. number for Mr. Chandran’s application for leave to appeal and waive any filing fee, if any, that would apply to the new file number.  There will be no need to replicate materials.  The filing and hearing dates will be the same for both applications for leave to appeal.  
 
 
THE STAY REQUEST
        On December 8, 2022, the appellants filed a motion for a stay and Brief in support, returnable on December 15, 2022.  The motion requests a stay of the convictions imposed by Boudreau J. on December 14, 2022.
        There are several problems with the requested relief.  Justice Boudreau fined the appellants $1,000.00 each on December 14, 2022, and in doing so, entered convictions against them.  How can I “stay a conviction” that has already been entered?  Where do I derive my authority to grant the requested relief?  And, even if I have that authority, have the appellants met their burden? 
        There are Criminal Code provisions that permit a court to suspend the operation of a sentence pending the hearing of an appeal.  Section 679 authorizes a judge of the appeal court to grant bail pending appeal from conviction or sentence.  In addition, an appeal court or a judge thereof can, pursuant to s. 683(5), suspend a broad range of orders until an appeal has been determined.  It provides as follows:
(5) If an appeal or an application for leave to appeal has been filed in the court of appeal, that court, or a judge of that court, may, when the court, or the judge, considers it to be in the interests of justice, order that any of the following be suspended until the appeal has been determined:
            (a) an obligation to pay a fine;
                        (b) an order of forfeiture or disposition of forfeited property;
                        (c) an order to make restitution under section 738 or 739;
                        (d) an obligation to pay a victim surcharge under section 737;
                        (e) a probation order under section 731; and
                        (f) a conditional sentence order under section 742.1.
        If the appellants had been sentenced to incarceration in an institution or to be served conditionally, bail or a suspension of the conditional sentence order would have been available.  I undoubtedly also have the power to suspend their obligation to pay a fine or the requirements of a probation order pending their appeals.  None of these pertain. 
        The appellants turn to Civil Procedure Rules 90.41(2) and 91.02(2) and the well-established jurisprudence in civil cases that authorizes a judge to stay enforcement and grant relief from the effects of judgments pending appeal (see for example, Nova Scotia (Attorney General) v. Morrison Estate, 2009 NSCA 116).  
        Jurisdiction outside the relevant Criminal Code provisions to grant a stay or similar relief in criminal cases is not universally accepted (see for example: R. v. Zurowski, 2003 ABCA 174; R. v. Howells, 2009 BCCA 297; R. v. Hehr, 2020 ABCA 444).  In Nova Scotia, the jurisdiction to order stays in situations not specifically enumerated in the Criminal Code appears to be well-accepted (see: R. v. Keating (1991), 1991 CanLII 2612 (NS CA), 106 N.S.R. (2d) 63; R. v. Dempsey (1995), 1995 NSCA 68 (CanLII), 138 N.S.R. (2d) 110; R. v. MacIntosh, 2008 NSCA 73; R. v. Nova Scotia (Ombudsman), 2017 NSCA 9). 
        Section 482 of the Criminal Code authorizes this Court to make rules with respect to appeals or matters incidental thereto.  It provides:
482(1) Every superior court of criminal jurisdiction and every court of appeal may make rules of court not inconsistent with this or any other Act of Parliament, and any rules so made apply to any prosecution, proceeding, action or appeal, as the case may be, within the jurisdiction of that court, instituted in relation to any matter of a criminal nature or arising from or incidental to any such prosecution, proceeding, action or appeal.
        Civil Procedure Rule 91 was made pursuant to this rule-making power. Rule 91.02 specifically provides that Rule 90 applies when not inconsistent with Rule 91:
91.02 Scope of Rule 91 
            (1)       This Rule is made under subsections 482(1) and (3) of the Code. 
            (2)        The Civil Procedure Rules as a whole and in particular Rule 90 apply to this Rule with any necessary modifications and when not inconsistent with this Rule. 
            (3)        The procedures in Rule 90 for motions made to a judge of the Court of Appeal and to the Court of Appeal apply to motions made under this Rule.
        Civil Procedure Rule 90.41 is as follows:
90.41 Stay of execution 
(1)  The filing of a notice of appeal shall not operate as a stay of execution or enforcement of the judgment appealed from. 
(2)  A judge of the Court of Appeal on application of a party to an appeal may, pending disposition of the appeal, order stayed the execution and enforcement of any judgment appealed from or grant such other relief against such a judgment or order, on such terms as may be just.
        Rule 91.01 defines judgment to include a conviction or order of a summary conviction appeal court:
“judgment” means a conviction, finding of guilt, acquittal, order staying a proceeding, sentence, verdict of unfit to stand trial, verdict of not criminally responsible on account of mental disorder, a decision or order of a summary conviction appeal court, and includes any other decision or order from which an appeal is available to the Court of Appeal;
        The problem is this: I am not being asked to stay the enforcement of the $1,000.00 fine imposed by Boudreau J.  That is something I could do pursuant to s. 683(5) of the Code.  Instead, I am being asked to issue an order that somehow undoes the fact convictions were entered concomitantly when the fines were imposed. 
        Counsel for the appellants suggested instead of a stay of convictions, I could issue an order that would prohibit the Clerk of the Nova Scotia Supreme Court from issuing certificates of convictions.  The theory is without certificates of conviction, the immigration officials could not forward documentary proof to the Minister to establish the appellants had in fact been convicted.  
        Perhaps I had the jurisdiction to order a stay of the scheduled December 14, 2022, sentence proceeding in the Supreme Court or have it to prohibit the Clerk from issuing certificates of conviction pending appeal.  However, even if I have such jurisdiction to grant these remedies, I am not satisfied the appellants have made out their burden to obtain a stay.  
        Over thirty years ago, in Purdy v. Fulton Insurance Agencies Ltd. (1990), 1990 CanLII 2357 (NS CA), 100 N.S.R. (2d) 341 (C.A.), Hallett J.A. articulated the requirements an applicant must meet for a stay in civil proceedings.  They have since been consistently applied in Nova Scotia.
        There are two tests described in Purdy.  The primary test requires the appellant to satisfy a judge on a balance of probabilities: (i) an arguable issue is raised by the appeal; (ii) if the stay is not granted and the appeal is successful the appellant will have suffered irreparable harm that it is difficult to or cannot be compensated for by a damage award; and (iii) the appellant will suffer greater harm if the stay is not granted than the respondent would suffer if the stay is granted (the balance of convenience).  The secondary test permits a judge to issue a stay even if the applicant cannot meet the primary test, but only where there are exceptional circumstances. 
        The appellants request I apply the Purdy primary test in the context of their applications for leave to appeal pursuant to s. 839 of the Criminal Code.  I need not discuss the secondary test.
        With respect to the primary test, the appellants addressed each requirement.  The need to demonstrate an “arguable issue” is not an onerous condition.  Typically, it does not engage a judge in a prolonged or detailed examination of the merits of an appeal.  
        Although “an arguable issue” is a low threshold, the appellant must at least identify realistic grounds which appear to be of sufficient substance to be capable of convincing a panel of the Court to allow the appeal.  In the words of Freeman J.A. in Amirault v. Westminer Canada Ltd. (1993), 1993 CanLII 3254 (NS CA), 125 N.S.R. (2d) 171, the ground of appeal must have a realistic chance of being able to convince a panel the judge erred in law (para. 11).
        Despite it being a low bar, the requirement must be met.  The appellants failed in Colpitts v. Nova Scotia Barristers’ Society, 2019 NSCA 45; Higgins v. Nova Scotia (Attorney General), 2013 NSCA 118, and Y. v. Swinemar, 2020 NSCA 56.  
        In this case, I am not satisfied the appellants have demonstrated they have a realistic chance of convincing a panel of this Court the SCAC judge erred in law.  
        The appellants’ brief describes their arguable issues as:
•         That the Summary Conviction Appeal Court Judge erroneously conducted a reversed analysis of the Nur framework: she began her analysis by first determining that the mandatory minimum was the appropriate sentence by virtue of the fact that it is a mandatory minimum.  She then worked backwards to determine whether the Appellants’ circumstances warranted a sentence that departed from the mandatory minimum.  In contrast, the Provincial Court Judges appropriately first determined the fit and proper sentences for the Appellants, including a reasonable assessment of the collateral consequences that they faced.  The Provincial Court Judges each then properly assessed whether the mandatory minimum would require them to impose sentences that were disproportionate to the sentences they deemed to be proper and fit.  In finding that it did, the Provincial Court Judges correctly found that the mandatory minimum breached the Appellants’ s.12 Charter rights, and imposed the appropriate sentence.
•         That the initial sentences imposed by the Provincial Court Judges were proper and fit sentences, taking into account all relevant factors and sentencing principles, including a proper analysis of collateral consequences for the Appellants.  With respect, the Summary Conviction Appeal Court Judge erred in her reliance on “starting points” or “sentencing ranges” in determining that the Provincial Court Judges had imposed demonstrably unfit sentences, and subsequently inappropriately intervened with the Provincial Court Judges’ discretion on sentencing. [footnotes omitted]
        These suggested errors are unfounded.  More importantly, the notion that a fine of $1,000.00 can constitute cruel and unusual punishment is untenable.  
        In both decisions, the SCAC judge correctly referred to the analytical framework established by the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Nur, 2015 SCC 15, to determine if a sentence mandated by Parliament amounts to cruel and unusual punishment contrary to s. 12 of the Charter.  
        The framework involves two steps: what is a fit and appropriate sentence considering the objectives and principles of sentence; and does the mandatory minimum require a court to impose a sentence that is grossly disproportionate to the fit and proper sentence.  For this latter enquiry, the mandatory minimum might be grossly disproportionate with respect to the offender or others in reasonably foreseeable situations (Nur, at paras. 46, 65, 77).  
        McLachlin C.J., for the majority in Nur, summarized the law as follows:
     In summary, when a mandatory minimum sentencing provision is challenged, two questions arise. The first is whether the provision results in a grossly disproportionate sentence on the individual before the court. If the answer is no, the second question is whether the provision's reasonably foreseeable applications will impose grossly disproportionate sentences on others. This is consistent with the settled jurisprudence on constitutional review and rules of constitutional interpretation, which seek to determine the potential reach of a law; is workable; and provides sufficient certainty.
        The Supreme Court has repeatedly endorsed this approach (see: R. v. Lloyd, 2016 SCC 13; R. v. Morrison, 2019 SCC 15).  As these and other cases make clear, the bar set by the Supreme Court for a sentence to be considered cruel and unusual punishment is high.  It must be so excessive so as to outrage standards of decency and be abhorrent or intolerable to society:
     The analytical framework to determine whether a sentence constitutes a "cruel and unusual" punishment under s. 12 of the Charter was recently clarified by this Court in Nur. A sentence will infringe s. 12 if it is "grossly disproportionate" to the punishment that is appropriate, having regard to the nature of the offence and the circumstances of the offender: Nur, at para. 39; R. v. Smith, 1987 CanLII 64 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 1045, at p. 1073. A law will violate s. 12 if it imposes a grossly disproportionate sentence on the individual before the court, or if the law's reasonably foreseeable applications will impose grossly disproportionate sentences on others: Nur, at para. 77.
…
     This Court has established a high bar for finding that a sentence represents a cruel and unusual punishment. To be "grossly disproportionate" a sentence must be more than merely excessive. It must be "so excessive as to outrage standards of decency" and "abhorrent or intolerable" to society: Smith, at p. 1072, citing Miller v. The Queen, 1976 CanLII 12 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 680, at p. 688; Morrisey, at para. 26; R. v. Ferguson, 2008 SCC 6, 1 S.C.R. 96, at para. 14. The wider the range of conduct and circumstances captured by the mandatory minimum, the more likely it is that the mandatory minimum will apply to offenders for whom the sentence would be grossly disproportionate.
R. v. Lloyd, supra 
        Boudreau J. acknowledged that although the sentence judges undertook the two steps described in Nur, they erred in both steps.  The first error was to find a discharge was within the appropriate range of sentence for this offence and the individual offenders.  Justice Boudreau referenced the fact that Canadian society, Parliament, and the courts have recognized the seriousness of impaired driving.  Penalties have increased over the years, and there is a need to emphasize deterrence and denunciation.  
        In both cases, a discharge was considered appropriate because of the immigration consequences for the appellants if convictions were entered.  The SCAC judge correctly noted the role for collateral immigration consequences was clearly laid out by the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Pham, 2013 SCC 15, where Wagner J., as he then was, for the Court, explained:
     The flexibility of our sentencing process should not be misused by imposing inappropriate and artificial sentences in order to avoid collateral consequences which may flow from a statutory scheme or from other legislation, thus circumventing Parliament's will.
     These consequences must not be allowed to dominate the exercise or skew the process either in favour of or against deportation. Moreover, it must not lead to a separate sentencing scheme with a de facto if not a de jure special range of sentencing options where deportation is a risk.
        In both cases, the SCAC judge reasoned as follows:
     In the case of Mr. Ankur, a discharge was simply not within the appropriate range of sentence for this offence and this offender. The discharge came about in order to avoid the immigration procedure that would follow.
     In her decision, in my view, the sentencing judge did exactly what the court in Pham said a sentencing court could not do; set up a separate sentencing scheme only for those persons in Mr. Ankur’s circumstances, i.e., a foreign national facing likely or probable deportation as a result of criminal convictions.
2022 NSSC 251, and 2022 NSSC 250 at paras. 47-48
        While I do not disagree with the SCAC judge’s comments about the seriousness of impaired driving offences, and the legions of caselaw that have emphasized the need to deter and denounce these crimes, the whole exercise whether a discharge is within the appropriate range of sentence is actually quite artificial in these circumstances.  
        That is because a conditional or absolute discharge has never been an available sentence for the offences of impaired care or control, refusing a breathalyzer demand, or care or control having a blood alcohol level of more than 80 mg of alcohol in 100 ml of blood.  
        A discharge is a legal invention.  It permits a finding of guilt but if an offender were granted a discharge, they can truthfully answer they have never been “convicted” of that offence.  
        Discharges first became available when Parliament enacted the Criminal Law Amendment Act, S.C. 1972, c. 13, s. 57.  It provided:
662.1(1)  Where an accused, other than a corporation, pleads guilty to or is found guilty of an offence, other than an offence for which a minimum punishment is prescribed by law or an offence punishable, in the proceedings commenced against him, by imprisonment for fourteen years or for life or by death, the court before which he appears may, if it considers it to be in the best interests of the accused and not contrary to the public interest, instead of convicting the accused, by order direct that the accused be discharged absolutely or upon the conditions prescribed in a probation order.
…
(3)  Where a court directs under subsection (1) that an accused be discharged, the accused shall be deemed not to have been convicted of the offence to which he pleaded guilty or of which he was found guilty and to which the discharge relates except that
(a)  the accused or the Attorney General may appeal from the direction that the accused be discharged as if that direction were a conviction in respect of the offence to which the discharge relates or, in the case of an appeal by the Attorney General, a finding that the accused was not guilty of that offence; and
(b)  the accused may plead autrefois convict in respect of any subsequent charge relating to the offence to which the discharge relates.[2]
        At the time of this enactment, the relevant Criminal Code offences (ss. 234, 235 and 236) all prescribed minimum mandatory penalties, even for a first offence.Prior to 1972, a discharge was not part of the Canadian criminal law lexicon.  The legislative bifurcation of guilt from conviction was a new Canadian invention.  
        Before 1972, a plea or finding of guilt constituted a conviction.  Martin J.A., writing for a five-member panel of the Ontario Court of Appeal in R. v. McInnis (1974), 1973 CanLII 545 (ON CA), 1 O.R. (2d) 1, described the law as follows:
A finding that the accused is guilty of the offence charged or a plea of guilty to an offence under ordinary circumstances constitutes a conviction for the offence although no sentence is imposed: R. v. Blaby, [1894] 2 Q.B. 170; R. v. Sheridan, [1937] 1 K.B. 223; R. v. Grant (1936), 26 Cr. App. R. 8; Ex p. Johnston, 1953 CanLII 121 (ON SC), [1953] O.R. 207, 105 C.C.C. 161, 16 C.R. 93 …
        Even a cursory examination of the relevant Criminal Code provisions prior to the 1972 Criminal Law Amendment Act, make clear a finding or plea of guilt constituted a conviction (Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1970, c. C-34, ss. 645(1)(2), 662(1), 663). 
        Every attempt to obtain a discharge for otherwise deserving offenders who had pled or been found guilty of drinking and driving offences has failed (R. v. Millen (1973), 1973 CanLII 1482 (NS CA), 13 C.C.C. (2d) 395 (N.S.S.C.A.D.); R. v. Poulin, 1974 CanLII 1740 (MB CA), 4 W.W.R. 104 (Man. C.A.); In Regina v. MacNeill (1974), 8 N.B.R. (2d) 467 (N.B.S.C.A.D.); R. v. Bradshaw, 1975 CanLII 19 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 162).
        The only avenue that has ever existed for a conditional discharge for a drinking and driving offence was through the curative discharge provision found in what was most recently numbered as s. 255(5) of the Criminal Code. This provision was in force at the time of Mr. Ankur’s offence.  He did not apply for it as he did not qualify.  
        Parliament abolished the possibility of a curative discharge in 2018. Instead, a court can elect not to impose the mandatory minimum punishment if an offender successfully completes a treatment program, but the Court is statutorily precluded from granting a discharge (s. 320.23(2)).
        As for the second “arguable issue”, at no time did the SCAC judge refer to “starting points” or somehow improperly rely on “sentencing ranges”.
        Even if I were to be convinced it is arguable the SCAC judge got it wrong to find the provincial court judges committed reversible error about the appropriate sentence for these appellants absent the mandatory minimum, it is simply not realistic to suggest the imposition of a $1,000.00 fine amounts to cruel and unusual punishment.  
        Counsel for the appellants could not identify any case that has suggested a fine can constitute cruel and unusual punishment.  If a court were to impose an excessive fine, an appeal court has the authority to intervene—not because the amount of the fine constitutes cruel and unusual punishment, but because of potential legal error by the sentencing judge or the fine is demonstrably unfit as being manifestly excessive.  
        It is simply not a tenable proposition that any fine, let along one of $1,000.00, is a punishment so excessive so as to outrage standards of decency and be abhorrent or intolerable to society.  
         Of course, it is not the fine that motivates the appellants—it is the attendant entry of convictions which trigger likely immigration consequences.  
        There must always be a first case.  But it is also telling that counsel could not point to any case in Canada which had found that the entry of a conviction and refusal to grant a discharge constitutes cruel and unusual punishment.  Every case is to the contrary (see: R. v. Luke, 2021 ONSC 3550; R. v. Sabattis, 2020 ONCJ 242); including ones where the conviction would trigger immigration consequences (see: R. v. Tebay, supra; R. v. Cummings, supra).
        Although not necessary, I will also refer, as did the SCAC judge, to Revell v. Canada (Citizenship and Immigration), 2019 FCA 262and Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration) v. Chiarelli, 1992 CanLII 87 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 711.
        First, let me observe, the SCAC judge did not order either appellant deported.  Deportation or the risk of deportation are not part of the sentence imposed.  She fined each appellant.  This triggered either a likelihood or possibility of deportation pursuant to the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, S.C. 2001, c. 27.  
        In Chiarelli, the appellant challenged the constitutionality of the former Actwhich allowed for a permanent resident to be deported if convicted of an offence for which a term of imprisonment of five years or more may be imposed.  The appellant relied on the Constitutional rights to life, liberty, and security of the person (s. 7) and not to be subject to cruel and unusual treatment or punishment (s. 12). 
        Sopinka J., for the Court, discounted the suggestion deportation for commission of a criminal offence could amount to a breach of fundamental justice (para. 27).  Similarly, deportation could not be said to outrage standards of decency and is not cruel and unusual punishment:
 The deportation of a permanent resident who has deliberately violated an essential condition of his or her being permitted to remain in Canada by committing a criminal offence punishable by imprisonment of five years or more, cannot be said to outrage standards of decency. On the contrary it would tend to outrage such standards if individuals granted conditional entry into Canada were permitted, without consequence, to violate those conditions deliberately.
        In Revell, the Court reviewed the current legislative scheme and protections afforded permanent residents and foreign nationals from being deported pursuant to a removal order.  The appellant was a permanent resident.  De Montigny J.A., for the Court, rejected the suggestion that deportation amounted to cruel and unusual treatment:
   Even if this were not the case, I would still find, for essentially the same reasons as those set out earlier with respect to "gross disproportionality" in the context of my section 7 analysis, that the appellant has not made out a breach of section 12 of the Charter. I agree with the Judge that, while it may be "slightly disproportionate" to deport the appellant if he is at low risk of reoffending (F.C. Reasons, at paragraph 223), this does not reach the high bar for a finding of cruel or unusual treatment. As noted above, the various processes in the inadmissibility determination and removal regime allow for individual circumstances to be considered, and protect against grossly disproportionate results.
        I am not convinced the appellants have put forward a realistic ground of appeal capable of convincing a panel of this Court that the application for leave to appeal should be granted and the appeal allowed. 
Irreparable harm
        The appellants put their case for irreparable harm as follows:
19.       The Appellants submit that their deportation in advance of the appeal hearing would cause irreparable harm.  Following removal from Canada on the basis of criminal inadmissibility, the Appellants would not be permitted re-entry to Canada, and would be unable to attend or participate in the hearing of their appeal. 
        Counsel conceded that if the appellants were to be successful on their appeal and have their conditional discharges reinstated, they would no longer have convictions and could gain re-entry.  The absence of the requested stays does not frustrate or render nugatory their applications for leave to appeal. 
        It is accurate that they might be unable to attend in person the appeal hearing.  This does not constitute irreparable harm.  I say this for three reasons.
        First, I scheduled the applications for leave to appeal to be heard by a panel of this Court on June 15, 2023.  I have absolutely no evidence when the appellants might exhaust their resistance to what the Courts below found to be a likely removal order as foreign nationals convicted of a criminal offence that was punishable by indictment.  Mr. Ankur’s affidavit simply states that upon a conviction being registered on December 14, 2022, he will become inadmissible to Canada under s. 36(2) of the Canadian Immigration and Refugee Protection Act.  
        Mr. Chandran deposes that:
9.         That I am advised, and do verily believe, that a file in my name is currently open with Mr. Chris McIntosh, an agent of the Canadian Border Services Agency (CBSA).  Mr. McIntosh initially closed my file following my sentencing hearing in Provincial Court.  However, following the appeal of my sentence, my file was re-opened.  I have been advised that, upon my conviction, the CBSA will commence the deportation process.  
        Second, the appellants’ physical presence is entirely unnecessary for their applications for leave to appeal to be prosecuted.
        If in Canada, and they were not in custody, they would have the right, as any member of the public would, to attend and observe the hearing.  They have counsel in appeals that involve questions of law alone.  If they were in custody in Canada, they would have no right to be present (s. 688(2) of the Criminal Code).  
        Third, this Court has the capacity and willingness to have parties appear using audio-visual technology.  
        I need not consider the balance of convenience.  
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
        Two fairly young foreign nationals came to Canada to study.  They remain on work permits.  They have no history of criminality.  
        They made mistakes.  Each appellant drove motor vehicles while impaired or while their blood alcohol level exceeded what the law permits.  Their Pre-Sentence Reports were positive.  
        The information before Judge Simmons was that Mr. Ankur was due to graduate from university in the spring of 2021 and had employment available.  He had made restitution for the damage caused by his actions.  He no longer drove and had returned to his religion that made alcohol taboo.  Mr. Ankur had committed himself to being a productive member of the community.
        Mr. Chandran comes from a good family in India.  Apparently, he had been nominated by the Nova Scotia Office of Immigration for the Provincial Nominee Program through Express Entry, and subsequently invited to apply for permanent residence.  He advised Judge Cromwell he has addressed his mental health issues, abstains from alcohol, and is in a positive long-term relationship.  
        Canada may well benefit from having such individuals as residents or citizens.  Their status and ability to remain in Canada are matters for the Minister of Immigration.  
        They have not satisfied me, on a balance of probabilities, they have advanced an arguable issue in their respective applications for leave to appeal.  It is an untenable proposition that a fine of $1,000.00 can constitute cruel and unusual punishment.  It cannot be viewed as a punishment so excessive so as to outrage standards of decency and be abhorrent or intolerable to society.  What would likely be incomprehensible to the average Canadian citizen is how a foreign national could receive a conditional discharge for a drinking and driving offence when that sentence option is beyond the reach of every Canadian citizen despite having an otherwise unblemished background.
        Furthermore, the appellants have not demonstrated a stay or other remedy is necessary to avoid frustrating or rendering nugatory their applications for leave to appeal. 
        I was not asked to determine if leave to appeal should be granted.  I set dates for the filing of facta and the appeal hearing.  Accordingly, the issue of leave to appeal will be decided by the panel which will hear this case on June 15, 2023.  
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ns/ca/2023nsca1.html
            A trial judge said he had a reasonable doubt and acquitted the respondent.  The Crown appeals on the basis the trial judge erred in his third step of the W.(D.) analysis when he concluded he had a reasonable doubt the respondent intentionally touched the complainant.  The Crown says this is inconsistent with the trial judge’s earlier disbelief of the respondent’s exculpatory testimony he had indeed touched the complainant’s groin, but it was by accident.
            Despite Mr. O’Leary’s efforts, the trial judge did not commit legal error.  Accordingly, I would dismiss the appeal. 
            To understand the Crown’s complaint, I will provide an overview of the trial evidence and the trial judge’s decision.
OVERVIEW
            Justice Scott Norton heard the trial on October 5, 2021.  It was short.  The evidence and submissions were completed in less than a day.  The Crown called three witnesses—the complainant, her friend, and the investigating officer.  The respondent testified, along with his wife.  
            The 17-year-old complainant moved into the respondent’s home in the winter of 2020 following a disagreement with her mother.  The respondent’s wife is the complainant’s paternal grandmother.  The family unit in the home included the complainant’s great-grandmother.
             Wednesday, May 18, 2020, started as a regular night for the household.  The family had gathered to watch TV in the living room.  Two diametrically opposed versions of what happened came out at trial.  The only common ground was that the complainant and the respondent occupied the couch and at one point they were alone for 10-15 minutes.  
            The complainant described sexual touching for over 30 minutes while the whole family watched TV.  She said the lights were off.  
            Her great-grandmother retired for the night.  The respondent’s wife also left for bed but returned 10-15 minutes later.  The complainant was adamant her grandmother and great-grandmother left at 10:45 p.m. because that was the time displayed on the TV.  She could remember it was 10:45 “like the back of my hand”.  This time assumes importance to the complainant’s reliability and credibility.
            During her grandmother’s absence, the complainant said the respondent not only rubbed her upper legs and vaginal area but put his hands down her pants and digitally penetrated her for 10-15 minutes.  The sexual assault only stopped when they heard the respondent’s wife get up and return to the living room.  
        Shortly afterward, the complainant took her grandmother’s laptop and went to bed.  Once in her bedroom, the complainant messaged her friend with a plea to come and pick her up.  Then she woke up her grandmother, and fell to her knees crying, trying to explain to her what had happened.  Her grandmother confronted the respondent which led him to say to the complainant, “I’m really sorry…”.  The respondent then left the house.  
        The complainant described how her grandmother convinced her to call the police.  When she did so, she found out they were already on their way because the friend and her mother had contacted the RCMP.  
        Cst. Nathan Sparks responded.  He encountered the respondent on the highway and convinced him to return home.  Once at the home, Cst. Sparks described both the complainant and her grandmother as pretty distraught.  Cst. Sparks arrested the respondent, and later took a cautioned audio statement from him.  Later that same night, audio-recorded statements were given by the complainant and her grandmother to Cst. Sparks.  
        There was no dispute at trial that the respondent and complainant were alone for 10-15 minutes in the living room.  Hence, ample opportunity for the alleged assault to have occurred.  However, when the respondent testified, he denied he had touched the complainant as she had described.  The respondent explained that when he stood up to leave the room, he used his hand to support himself, he slipped, and his hand came into contact with her vaginal area.  He moved it immediately and said he was sorry.  
        The respondent’s evidence suffered frailties.  In cross-examination, he admitted his recorded police statement contains no mention of getting up off the couch and consequent accidental touching.  He explained he told Cst. Sparks this detail before the tape was on.  In fact, he said he had done so when they had first entered the police car.  Cst. Sparks insisted his practice is to never question a suspect in the police car, and he had no substantive exchanges with the respondent prior to arrival at the Detachment.  Other apparent inconsistencies between the respondent’s police statement and his trial testimony were explored.
        The complainant’s grandmother testified.  She contradicted the complainant on a number of details.  The lights were not off while they watched TV.  She could see the complainant on the couch with her legs stretched out over the respondent (not curled up and distanced from him).  She observed no fleeting touching, let alone sexualized touching for 30 minutes.  It was 9:45 p.m. when she and the complainant’s great-grandmother left.  She returned before 10:00 p.m.  She knew this as the same show was still on.  The complainant left for bed with the laptop at 10:15 p.m.  
        The complainant’s grandmother disagreed the complainant had fallen to her knees crying.  The complainant did disclose to her an allegation of inappropriate touching.  
        When the complainant’s grandmother confronted the respondent with the allegation he had inappropriately touched the complainant, she testified he said “oh, God, he said, no, he said not on purpose.  He said I went to get up to use the washroom and me hand slipped and that was it”.  She also denied she had tried to convince the complainant to call the police.
         The complainant’s friend E.P. testified for the Crown.  She confirmed being contacted by the complainant through Facebook messenger at 10:38 p.m.  This time was authenticated by a printed screenshot of their message exchange.
        Ms. P. explained the complainant and her brother had just broken up.  She described it as very heart breaking.  The complainant had reached out to Ms. P.’s brother looking for help, twenty minutes prior to messaging her.  
        Submissions followed immediately after the defence closed its case.  I need not canvass every point made. Both counsel acknowledged credibility to be the key issue.  The respondent argued the complainant had exaggerated what had happened, and in light of the clear error as to time, there existed a serious problem with reliability.  The Crown suggested any problems with the complainant’s evidence were just in relation to peripheral details and urged the judge to convict.  
 
 
        The trial judge reserved.  On October 25, 2021, he delivered an oral decision.  It has since been reported (2021 NSSC 305).  The judge accurately observed that findings of credibility and reliability were fundamental to his decision whether the Crown had proven the charge beyond a reasonable doubt (para. 10). 
        The trial judge referred to a number of authorities to inform himself of the bedrock principles of proof beyond a reasonable doubt, the difference between credibility and reliability, how to assess credibility, and the analytical framework described R. v. W.(D.), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 742, designed to preclude misapplication of the criminal burden of proof.  
        After setting out the essential elements of sexual assault, the judge said he would first examine whether the Crown had proven beyond a reasonable doubt the respondent applied force intentionally.  
        The trial judge did not accept the respondent’s evidence in some respects.  In particular, his evidence that he told Cst. Sparks he had touched the complainant accidentally (para. 29).  The judge later repeated his rejection of the respondent’s testimony that he had advised the police any contact was accidental (para. 61).
        The trial judge also found that the respondent’s evidence alone did not raise a reasonable doubt:
     I also find that Mr. G.'s evidence does not alone raise a reasonable doubt that the touching was unintended for the reasons expressed above. I therefore need to proceed to the third step of W.(D.), an assessment of the evidence as a whole.
        The complainant’s evidence was the centrepiece of the Crown’s case.  The trial judge said he had concerns about her evidence.  He agreed her evidence had been exaggerated.  He said he found it difficult to believe the complainant’s grandmother and great-grandmother would have been unaware and unresponsive to a sexual assault going on for 30 minutes in such close proximity.  In his words, it would have been “plainly obvious to anyone” in their respective positions. 
        After canvassing the discrepancies between the complainant’s version and her grandmother’s evidence and other physical evidence, he reasoned:
 
 
     Events may have happened as the complainant described. It is not my role to determine what happened in the living room that night or whether I prefer the evidence of the complainant more than the person charged. The question I have to answer is whether, based on all of the evidence, the Crown has proved beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. G. committed a sexual assault.
     Having considered all of the evidence I find that I am left with a reasonable doubt as to whether Mr. G. intentionally touched the complainant.
     I find Mr. G. not guilty of the charge of sexual assault.
        With this overview in hand, I turn to the Crown’s arguments on appeal.  Originally, the Crown advanced three grounds:
1.         That the learned Trial Judge erred in law by failing to give legal effect to findings of fact;
2.         That the learned Trial Judge erred in law by failing to consider the whole of the evidence related to the live issues at trial;
3.         That the learned Trial Judge erred in law by misapprehending the evidence;
        In its factum, the Crown abandons any suggestion the trial judge misapprehended the evidence and collapses grounds one and two into one argument.  Its factum summarizes the essence of their argument as follows:
61.       In essence, the Trial Judge rejected the Respondent’s evidence that he had touched A.H. accidentally. If the touching was not accidental, the Trial Judge failed to give legal effect to that finding. The legal effect of the finding would be that the touching was intentional. In addition, the Trial Judge could not have been left with the reasonable doubt about whether the Respondent had intentionally touched A.H. if he had considered the whole of the evidence. Had he done so, any concerns the Trial Judge had with A.H.’s evidence being exaggerated would have been relieved. The Trial Judge finding the Respondent had not accidentally touched A.H. would confirm A.H.’s evidence that she had been intentionally touched by the Respondent. The Trial Judge failed to consider this corroborative evidence when he applied the third step of W.(D.).
ANALYSIS
        This Court only has jurisdiction to review a judgment or verdict of acquittal if the ground of appeal engages a question of law alone (s. 676(1) Criminal Code).  The question, what constitutes a question of law alone, is fundamental.  It is not always easily answered.  
        What is known is this: the Crown has no right to argue an acquittal should be overturned because it is unreasonable or otherwise unsupported by the evidence.  That is because the underlying reason for a trial judge’s acquittal of an accused is a finding of reasonable doubt—a determination that is a finding of fact or mixed fact and law (R. v. Biniaris, 2000 SCC 15, at para. 32). 
        An acquittal based on a conclusion of reasonable doubt unsullied by material legal error is not amenable to appeal (R. v. Percy, 2020 NSCA 11; R. v. McNeil, 2022 NSCA 55, at paras. 9-10).
        This does not mean an acquittal grounded on findings of fact is immune from appellate scrutiny.  A judge commits legal error if they engage in speculation (Wild v. The Queen, 1970 CanLII 148 (SCC), S.C.R. 101; R. v. White, 1994 NSCA 77) or they misdirect themselves on the relevant legal issues (R. v. I.E.B., 2013 NSCA 98).  
        Cromwell J., in R. v. J.M.H., 2011 SCC 45, identified four scenarios where an appeal court can reverse acquittals despite being ostensibly based on evidentiary assessments or factual determinations: 
1.  It is an error of law to make a finding of fact for which there is no evidence – however, a conclusion that the trier of fact has a reasonable doubt is not a finding of fact for the purpose of this rule.
2.  The legal effect of findings of fact or of undisputed facts raises a question of law.
3.  An assessment of evidence based on a wrong legal principle is an error of law.
4.  The trial judge's failure to consider all of the evidence in relation to the ultimate issue of guilt or innocence is an error of law.
        However, an appellate court cannot translate strong opposition to a trial judge’s factual findings into legal errors (R. v. George, 2017 SCC 38, at para. 17).
        In addition, even if legal error were established, in order to obtain appellate relief, the Crown must also satisfy the court with a reasonable degree of certainty the verdict would not necessarily have been the same (see: R. v. Sutton, 2000 SCC 50; R. v. Graveline, 2006 SCC 16).  I need not consider this additional hurdle as I am not satisfied the trial judge erred on a question of law alone.
        The Crown attempts to fit its arguments into the scenarios described in R. v. J.M.H. in two ways.  The first is the suggestion the trial judge failed to give legal effect to his findings of fact.  It argues the judge rejected the respondent’s evidence that he had touched A.H. accidentally.  If the touching was not accidental, the legal effect of the finding would be that the touching was intentional.  In other words, the trial judge could not have been left with the reasonable doubt about whether the respondent had intentionally touched the complainant.
        The second is that the judge erred in his application of the third step in W.(D.) by not considering all of the evidence on the ultimate issue of guilt or innocence.  
        W.(D.) has probably created more appellate review than any other case.  On reflection this seems strange, since the reason for the W.(D.) three-step approach to analyze trial evidence is so easily expressed and understood—the path to conviction can never degenerate into a contest between whether to believe the complainant or exculpatory evidence.  In order to convict, the trier of fact must be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt of the accused’s guilt.  
        To keep true to this principle, Cory J. in W.(D.) made the following mild suggestion:
     Ideally, appropriate instructions on the issue of credibility should be given, not only during the main charge, but on any recharge. A trial judge might well  instruct the jury on the question of credibility along these lines:
First, if you believe the evidence of the accused, obviously you must acquit.
Second, if you do not believe the testimony of the accused but you are left in reasonable doubt by it, you must acquit.
Third, even if you are not left in doubt by the evidence of the accused, you must ask yourself whether, on the basis of the evidence which you do accept, you are convinced beyond a reasonable doubt by that evidence of the guilt of the accused. 
If that formula were followed, the oft repeated error which appears in the recharge in this case would be avoided. The requirement that the Crown prove the guilt of the accused beyond a reasonable doubt is fundamental in our system of criminal law. Every effort should be made to avoid mistakes in charging the jury on this basic principle.
        With respect, the trial judge did not find as a fact that the touching of the complainant was not accidental.  The judge rejected the respondent’s evidence that he had told Cst. Sparks he had accidentally touched the complainant.  At no time in his decision did the trial judge find the respondent had applied force intentionally.
        The judge said this:
     I do not accept Mr. G.'s evidence that he told Cst. Sparks it was accidental. He also told Cst. Sparks in his recorded statement that "I knew I did something wrong".
        Later, the trial judge concluded he did not believe all of the respondent’s evidence.  The judge pointed out the contradictions between his police statement and his trial evidence of an accidental touching.  He said he did not believe the respondent’s testimony that he had told Cst. Sparks the contact was accidental:
     … Mr. G. suggested in his testimony that he told Cst. Sparks that the contact was accidental when he was in the police vehicle. I do not believe that to be true.
        It is not completely clear whether the judge was trying to express he disbelieved the respondent’s evidence any contact was accidental or his disbelief of the respondent’s claim he had told Cst. Sparks that was the case.  In any event, it makes no difference.  
        Disbelief of an accused’s exculpatory evidence cannot amount to a make-weight—a fact to be put into the Crown’s bin to meet its burden of proof.  To permit such an approach would impermissibly distort the fundamental principle that the burden of proof is on the Crown (R. v. J.P., 2014 NSCA 29, leave to appeal refused, S.C.C.A. No. 255; R. v. O’Connor (2002), 2002 CanLII 3540 (ON CA), 166 O.A.C. 202).
        The respondent had no burden to prove he had not touched the complainant intentionally.  Disbelief cannot be used to dilute the Crown’s burden of proof.
        The trial judge then turned to the second step in W.(D.).  He concluded the respondent’s evidence alone did not raise a reasonable doubt:
     I also find that Mr. G.'s evidence does not alone raise a reasonable doubt that the touching was unintended for the reasons expressed above. I therefore need to proceed to the third step of W.(D.), an assessment of the evidence as a whole.
[Emphasis added]
        In the third step of W.(D.), the Crown says the trial judge erred by not viewing the respondent’s evidence as corroborative of the complainant and by reliance on the disbelieved evidence of the respondent to find a reasonable doubt.  
        I start by saying, I do not doubt an accused’s evidence may be looked at to see if it corroborates aspects of the Crown’s case, and a trier of fact may decide not to credit defence evidence which they have disbelieved.  But the question is always, is the trier of fact satisfied as to the guilt of the accused beyond a reasonable doubt based on the totality of the evidence?
        In this case, the trial judge referred to a number of decisions to inform his analysis.  Early in his decision, he quoted from R. v. P.S.B., 2004 NSCA 25, in relation to the three-step W.(D.) framework: 
     W.(D.) is concerned with how a trier of fact should apply the burden of proof in a criminal case where the accused testifies. In brief, the trier must remember that the issue is not whether he or she believes the accused, but whether the evidence as a whole convinces the trier of fact of the accused's guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. If the trier of fact believes the exculpatory evidence of the accused, an acquittal must follow. However, even if the trier does not believe that evidence, the trier must ask him or herself if it nonetheless gives rise to a reasonable doubt. Finally, if the trier does not believe the accused and is not left in doubt on the basis of that evidence, the trier must still address and resolve the most critical, in fact, the only question in every criminal case: Does the evidence as a whole convince the trier of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt?
        Later in his reasons, at the outset of his credibility and reliability analysis, the trial judge repeated the need to be focussed on reasonable doubt and not on trying to resolve the broad factual question of what happened:
     I wish to first refer to the comments of Justice Cromwell (as he then was) in R. v. Mah, 2002 NSCA 99, at para 41:
41 The W. (D.) principle is not a "magic incantation" which trial judges must mouth to avoid appellate intervention. Rather, W. (D.) describes how the assessment of credibility relates to the issue of reasonable doubt. What the judge must not do is simply choose between alternative versions and, having done so, convict if the complainant's version is preferred. W. (D.) reminds us that the judge at a criminal trial is not attempting to resolve the broad factual question of what happened. The judge's function is the more limited one of deciding whether the essential elements of the charge have been proved beyond reasonable doubt: see R. v. Avetysan, 2000 SCC 56 (CanLII), [2000] 2 S.C.R. 745, [2000] S.C.J. No. 57 (S.C.C.), at 756. As Binnie, J. put it in Sheppard, the ultimate issue is not whether the judge believes the accused or the complainant or part or all of what they each had to say. The issue at the end of the day in a criminal trial is not credibility but reasonable doubt.
[Emphasis by the trial judge]
        After detailing what he saw as the problems with the complainant’s credibility and reliability, particularly as it compared to defence evidence and other evidence, he concluded:
     Events may have happened as the complainant described. It is not my role to determine what happened in the living room that night or whether I prefer the evidence of the complainant more than the person charged. The question I have to answer is whether, based on all of the evidence, the Crown has proved beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. G. committed a sexual assault.
     Having considered all of the evidence I find that I am left with a reasonable doubt as to whether Mr. G. intentionally touched the complainant.
     I find Mr. G. not guilty of the charge of sexual assault.
[Emphasis added]
        The Crown puts its argument as follows:
92.       Even if A.H. had exaggerated, she could not have been inaccurate about touching having occurred, given the Respondent admitted to touching her. As stated, the Trial Judge did not believe the touching was accidental. He did not accept the Respondent’s evidence on this issue. When applying the third step of W.(D.), disbelieved evidence of an accused does not constitute evidence that can raise a reasonable doubt. (R. v. Haroun 1997 CanLII 382 (SCC), [1997] 1 SCR 593 at para. 20)
[Emphasis added]
        At the hearing, Mr. O’Leary acknowledged R. v. Haroun,at para. 20, does not in fact stand for the proposition set out in para. 92 of the Crown’s factum.  The concession is appropriate.
        In Haroun, the respondent stood trial on a murder charge.  The respondent admitted he had committed manslaughter, but due to depression and consumption of alcohol lacked the intent to commit murder.  Expert evidence was called.  The trial judge attempted (but did not accurately follow) the suggested W.(D.) model.  The jury convicted the respondent of murder.  
        The majority of the Quebec Court of Appeal (Beauregard J.A., Philippon J. ad hoc concurring) allowed the appeal and ordered a new trial (J.Q. No. 67; 1997 CanLII 382 (SCC), 115 C.C.C. (3d) 261).  
        Beauregard J.A. wrote as follows:
16        J'accepte l'argument de l'avocat de l'appelant suivant lequel il est erroné de dire à un jury de ne pas mettre dans la balance le témoignage d'un accusé que le jury ne croit pas. Il est exact qu'en toute logique un témoignage non cru ne prouve rien. Mais l'accusé n'a rien à prouver et, en bout de piste, le témoignage de l'accusé doit être pris en compte lorsque le jury se demande si l'ensemble de la preuve le persuade hors de tout doute raisonnable de la culpabilité de l'accusé.
…
19        Parce qu'après avoir tenté de diriger le jury suivant R. c. W.(D.), le juge a répété qu'un témoignage non cru ne constitue pas "de la preuve":
Alors il est de votre devoir de vous consulter d'abord, de discuter entre vous et de délibérer, c'est-à-dire d'envisager tous les aspects de la cause, de réfléchir et de tenter de vous entendre sur un verdict, un verdict juste et légal, c'est-à-dire un verdict fondé, basé uniquement et exclusivement sur la preuve qui a été faite devant vous. Alors seuls les faits révélés par les témoins qui ont été entendus et que vous avez décidé de croire constituent de la preuve, y compris en plus [...] les exhibits et les admissions.
20        Rapprochant la première et la deuxième directives, l'avocat de l'appelant nous propose que, si le jury suivait l'enseignement du juge et s'il n'était pas disposé à croire l'accusé, il ne pouvait avoir un doute raisonnable: un témoignage cru permet le doute raisonnable; un témoignage non cru ne constitue pas "de la preuve" et, en conséquence, ne sert à rien; donc un témoignage non cru ne peut susciter un doute raisonnable.
        Canada Law Book’s Canadian Criminal Cases (1997 CanLII 382 (SCC), 115 C.C.C. (3d) 261, at pp. 264-5) reports his reasons as follows:
            I accept the argument of counsel for the appellant according to which it is an error to say to a jury not to take into consideration the accused’s testimony which the jury does not believe.  It is correct that logically speaking, testimony not believed proves nothing.  But the accused has nothing to prove and, at the end of the day, the accused’s testimony must be taken into consideration when the jury asks itself whether the whole of the evidence persuades it beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused is guilty.
[…]
            Because after attempting to charge the jury in accordance with R. v. W.(D.), the judge repeated that testimony not believed does not constitute “proof” [translation]:
It is your duty to consult yourselves first, to discuss amongst yourselves and to deliberate, that is to envisage all the aspects of the case, to reflect and to attempt to agree among yourselves on a verdict, a fair and legal verdict, that is a verdict based solely and exclusively on the evidence called before you. Only the facts disclosed by the witnesses who were heard and that you have decided to believe constitutes proof, including in addition … the exhibits and the admissions.
            Counsel for the appellant argues that the second and third instructions are erroneous. He argues that, if the jury followed the judge’s instructions and if they were inclined to believe the accused, there could not have been a reasonable doubt: testimony which is believed permits a reasonable doubt; testimony which is not believed does not constitute “proof” and, as a result, is useless; therefore testimony not believed cannot give rise to a reasonable doubt.
        Deschamps J.A., as she then was, dissented because there was no conflict for the jury to resolve about what the respondent had consumed.  The W.(D.) formula was not sacrosanct and the jury charge taken as a whole was sufficient.  Intervention was not warranted.  She wrote:
27        Il est vrai que le juge a surtout traité de la preuve de façon globale. L'appelant cite d'ailleurs neuf extraits des directives où le juge commente le rôle du jury dans son appréciation de la preuve dans son ensemble. L'appelant plaide que le juge n'a pas suivi le modèle de directives suggérées par la Cour suprême dans R. c. W.(D.).
28        Eu égard au fait que l'appelant avait témoigné pour sa défense, il aurait été plus prudent et les directives n'en auraient été que plus claires si le juge avait, de façon distincte, traité de la règle voulant que la défense bénéficie du doute raisonnable quant à la crédibilité de l'appelant. L'appelant ne m'a cependant pas convaincue qu'il y a lieu d'intervenir.
29        En effet, d'une part, le juge a beaucoup insisté sur la suffisance d'un doute raisonnable sur l'intention de l'appelant pour permettre au jury de ne prononcer qu'un verdict d'homicide involontaire; d'autre part, le jury n'était pas confronté à des versions contradictoires. Seul l'appelant a témoigné de sa consommation. Son témoignage quant aux quantités consommées n'est d'ailleurs pas des plus précis. Outre les policiers appelés sur les lieux, son fils et sa fille ont témoigné de son attitude dans les moments qui suivirent l'homicide. Aucune version ne peut être qualifiée de contradictoire avec le témoignage de l'appelant. En ce sens, l'appréciation du témoignage de l'appelant pouvait difficilement être faite indépendamment de la preuve dans son ensemble. Il ne s'agissait pas comme dans R. c. W.(D.) d'apprécier des témoignages contradictoires donnés en défense et en poursuite.
 
 
30        La Cour l'a répété à plusieurs reprises, la formule de R. c. W.(D.) n'est pas sacramentelle. Les directives doivent être évaluées de façon globale. En l'occurrence, selon moi, elles ne prêtent pas à intervention.
        The C.C.C. version reports her reasons as follows:
            It is true that the judge mostly dealt with the evidence in a global manner. The appellant furthermore quotes nine extracts from the charge where the judge commented on the role of the jury in the assessment of the evidence as a whole. The appellant argues that the judge did not follow the model charge suggested by the Supreme Court in R. v. W.(D.), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), [1991] 1 S.C.R. 742, 63 C.C.C. (3d) 397.
            Having regard to the fact that the appellant testified in his defence, it would have been more prudent and the instructions would have been even clearer if the judge had dealt separately with the rule to the effect that the defence gets the benefit of the reasonable doubt with respect to the appellant's credibility. The appellant has not however convinced me that it would be proper to intervene.
            On the one hand, the judge stressed that a reasonable doubt about the appellant's intention was sufficient to permit the jury to render a manslaughter verdict; on the other hand, the jury was not confronted with contradictory versions. Only the appellant testified with respect to his consumption (of drugs and alcohol). His testimony with respect to the quantities consumed is not the most specific either. Besides the police officers called to the scene, his son and daughter testified as to his attitude in the moments which followed the homicide. No version can be characterized as contradicting the appellant's version. In this sense, one could difficultly [sic] assess the appellant's testimony independent of the evidence as a whole. This is not a case like in R. v. W.(D.) where the jury had to assess contradictory testimony called by the defence and the Crown.
            The Court repeated the formula in R. v. W.(D.) several times; it is not the only way.  The instructions must be assessed globally. In the case at bar, in my view, they do not merit intervention.
p. 266-7
        The Crown appealed to the Supreme Court, as of right.  La Forest J., for the majority (L’Heureux-Dubé and Gonthier JJ.), adopted without comment or elaboration Justice Deschamps’ dissent:
       For the reasons given by Deschamps J.A., dissenting in the Quebec Court of Appeal, Q.J. No. 67 (QL), J.E. 96-357, [ante, p. 263] I would allow the appeal, set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal and restore the conviction for second degree murder.
1 S.C.R. 393
        Sopinka J. in dissent (Major J. concurring) firmly rejected the concept that disbelieved evidence is to be siloed from the trier of facts’ determination whether the Crown’s case had been proven beyond a reasonable doubt.  He explained:
     In the case at bar, the trial judge instructed the jury that the evidence is nothing other than what the jury believes and accepts out of the testimony and the exhibits. He then told them that even if they did not believe the accused's testimony, if they had a reasonable doubt "on the basis of the evidence as a whole" they had to acquit on the charge of second degree murder. Finally, he repeated that "only the facts disclosed by the witnesses you heard and have decided to believe constitute evidence". What these passages suggest is that if the jury did not believe the accused or Dr. Talbot, their testimony was by definition not included in "the evidence" and therefore could not be considered when the jury asked itself whether it had a reasonable doubt on the basis of the evidence as a whole. In other words, the trial judge clearly instructed the jurors that if they did not believe the accused, they could find a reasonable doubt only in the testimony of any other witnesses they had decided to believe.
        Sopinka J. added it would be wrong to have a trier of fact parse out of their deliberations evidence it has disbelieved:
     However, in the case at bar it is the appellant [Crown] who is proposing that the charge be subjected to minute scrutiny. It is by reading the charge as a whole that the error can be seen: since the disbelieved testimony of the accused does not constitute evidence, it cannot raise a reasonable doubt. There is therefore a reasonable possibility that the jury might have been misled by these misdirections.
        I see nothing in the reasons of Deschamps J.A., which the majority of the Supreme Court adopted, that is in any way contrary to Justice Sopinka’s analysis of the relevant principles.  
        The Crown acknowledges it could find no cases to support its proposition that considering disbelieved evidence in the third step amounts to legal error.  Instead, it points to comments by Justice Paciocco, writing extra-judicially, in his article, “Doubt about Doubt: Coping with R. v. W.(D.) and Credibility Assessment” (2017) 22 Can Crim L Rev 3.  In that article, he wrote about the third W.(D.) step as follows:
 
 
The third component of the W. (D.) framework states:
“Thirdly, even if you are not left in doubt by the evidence of the accused, you must ask yourself whether, on the basis of the evidence you do accept, you are convinced beyond a reasonable doubt by the evidence of the guilt of the accused.”
This third component differs from the other two W. (D.) rules. They focus solely on the “inconsistent” or exculpatory evidence, whereas this component of the W. (D.) framework examines the sufficiency of the remaining evidence after the inconsistent or exculpatory evidence is rejected in its entirety, or “totally rejected” as untrue, beyond a reasonable doubt. In this sense, this rule reflects a proposition that applies in all criminal cases, even if no exculpatory evidence had ever been presented; the accused should not be convicted unless the evidence that is credited proves the guilt of the accused beyond a reasonable doubt. 
p. 14-5 [Emphasis added] 
        The logic of Justice Paciocco’s suggestion is unassailable.  How can evidence that has been totally rejected as untrue, beyond a reasonable doubt, nonetheless play a role in a trier of fact’s ultimate determination? 
        In all likelihood, it would not.  But to accept that a jury should be told, or a judge must exclude from their consideration, admissible evidence in its ultimate determination of guilt or innocence would be highly problematic.  It invites examination of evidence in a piecemeal fashion—a concept long ago rejected in R. v. Morin, 1988 CanLII 8 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 345. 
        In Morin, the jury at his first trial acquitted.  The Ontario Court of Appeal ordered a new trial.  The Supreme Court affirmed.  Sopinka J., for the majority, rejected any piecemeal evidence assessment, including in cases which hinge on the credibility of defence evidence.  Instead, the trier of fact must assess defence evidence in the context of all of the evidence:
     The appellant submits, citing R. v. Challice (1979), 1979 CanLII 2969 (ON CA), 45 C.C.C. (2d) 546 (Ont. C.A.), that different considerations apply where the credibility of defence evidence is at issue. In such cases the argument is that the defence evidence does not have to be believed but "only has to raise a reasonable doubt". That does not mean, however, that the defence evidence or the evidence which it contradicts or explains is to be examined piecemeal. The judgment of Morden J.A. in Challice, supra, which the appellant agrees expresses the traditional view and is consistent with the judgment of this Court in Nadeau v. The Queen, 1984 CanLII 28 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 570, and R. v. Thatcher, 1987 CanLII 53 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 652, correctly states the law in the following passage (at p. 557):
Understandably, a jury have to give careful consideration to issues of credibility when deliberating upon their verdict, and with respect to various pieces of evidence they may have differing views: total acceptance, total rejection, or something in between. An effective and desirable way of recognizing this necessary part of the process, and putting it to the jury in a way that accurately comports with their duty respecting the burden and standard of proof, is to instruct the jury that it is not necessary for them to believe the defence evidence on a vital issue -- but that it is sufficient if it, viewed in the context of all the evidence, leaves them in a state of reasonable doubt as to the accused's guilt: see R. v. Lobell, [1957] 1 Q.B. 547 at p. 551, per Lord Goddard, C.J. [Emphasis added.]
        Here, as noted, the Crown interprets Justice Paciocco’s discussion as requiring exclusion from the deliberative process on guilt or innocence all defence evidence that has been rejected on the criminal standard of beyond a reasonable doubt.  Justice Sopinka in Morin explained why, in his view, this approach would be wrong in principle and unworkable in practice: 
     The argument in favour of a two-stage application of the criminal standard has superficial appeal in theory but in my respectful opinion is wrong in principle and unworkable in practice. In principle it is wrong because the function of a standard of proof is not the weighing of individual items of evidence but the determination of ultimate issues. Furthermore, it would require the individual member of the jury to rely on the same facts in order to establish guilt. The law is clear that the members of the jury can arrive at their verdict by different routes and need not rely on the same facts. Indeed the jurors need not agree on any single fact except the ultimate conclusion. See Wigmore on Evidence (Chadbourn rev. 1981,) vol. 9, § 2497, at pp. 412-14; R. v. Lynch, Malone and King (1978), 1978 CanLII 2347 (ON CA), 40 C.C.C. (2d) 7 (Ont. C.A.), at p. 19; R. v. Bouvier (Ont. C.A.), supra, at pp. 264-65; R. v. Moreau (1986), 1986 CanLII 4618 (ON CA), 26 C.C.C. (3d) 359 (Ont. C.A.), at p. 389; R. v. Agbim, Crim. L.R. 171 (C.A.); R. v. Thatcher (1986), 1986 CanLII 159 (SK CA), 24 C.C.C. (3d) 449 (Sask. C.A.), at p. 510, appeal dismissed, 1987 CanLII 53 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 652, at p. 697.
     The matter is summed up in Cross on Evidence, op. cit., at p. 146:
It has been held by the Court of Appeal that it is unnecessary for a judge to direct the jury that it must be unanimous with regard to even one item of evidence bearing upon a particular count before convicting on it. It seems to be enough that all members of the jury find the accused guilty upon the basis of some of the facts bearing upon that count.
     In practice it is not practical not only because the jury would have to agree on the same facts but what individual facts prove. Individual facts do not necessarily establish guilt but are a link in the chain of ultimate proof. It is not possible therefore to require the jury to find facts proved beyond a reasonable doubt without identifying what it is that they prove beyond a reasonable doubt. Since the same fact may give rise to different inferences tending to establish guilt or innocence, the jury might discard such facts on the basis that there is doubt as to what they prove.
        I would respectfully agree.  To accede to the Crown’s suggestion would be to elevate the language in the suggested jury charge in W.(D.) to a statutory formula—with the consequence that a judge who does not follow its strictures, commits legal error.  Only the evidence the jury or the judge has decided to accept would be considered in the third step of the W.(D.) framework.  
        Such an approach would be contrary to the thousands of appellate cases which have reinforced the reality that the W.(D.) formula is not a magic incantation.  The fundamental purpose of the formula is to ensure triers of fact do not simply view the outcome of a criminal trial as a credibility contest—to chose one side over another (R. v. Cyr, 2012 ONCA 919, at paras. 48-53).  To do so misapplies the burden of proof.  At the end of the day, the key is whether the trier of fact understood the correct burden and standard of proof (see: R. v. Lifchus, 1997 CanLII 319 (SCC), 3 S.C.R. 320, at para. 41).
        Justice Paciocco’s own article recognizes the imperfect language of the suggested W.(D.) jury charge and the importance of keeping foremost the underlying purpose and principles of the suggested framework it advocates:
First, the W. (D.) framework is stated imperfectly. As will be illustrated, the rules that it articulates are imprecise reflections of its underlying principles. “Subtleties and complexities ... [left unaddressed in the W. (D). framework] can cause judges to misapply or misunderstand its various aspects.” The rule can best be understood, then, not by its language, but through its underlying purpose and the principles that purpose generates.
Second, although accurate references to the rule can reduce the risks of appellate intervention, compliance with the rules is a matter of substance, not form. Although it is helpful to do so, it is not enough to state the framework accurately. A judge's reasoning must conform to the underlying principles. In R. v. Y. (C.L.) the Supreme Court of Canada found, for example, that a trial judge who had properly articulated the test had inadvertently shifted the burden of proof in her reasoning, and so the conviction was overturned. 
p. 3 [Emphasis added]
        There are also authorities that eschew any approach that would silo disbelieved defence evidence.  For example in R. v. Dinardo, 2008 SCC 24, Charron J., for the unanimous Court, wrote:
     The majority rightly stated that there is nothing sacrosanct about the formula set out in W. (D.). Indeed, as Chamberland J.A. himself acknowledged in his dissenting reasons, the assessment of credibility will not always lend itself to the adoption of the three distinct steps suggested in W. (D.); it will depend on the context (para. 112). What matters is that the substance of the W. (D.) instruction be respected. In a case that turns on credibility, such as this one, the trial judge must direct his or her mind to the decisive question of whether the accused's evidence, considered in the context of the evidence as a whole, raises a reasonable doubt as to his guilt. Put differently, the trial judge must consider whether the evidence as a whole establishes the accused's guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. In my view, the substantive concerns with the trial judge's decision in this case can better be dealt with under the rubric of the sufficiency of his reasons for judgment.
[Emphasis added]
        In R. v. D.S.C., 2004 NSCA 135, Cromwell J.A., as he then was, writing for the Court, emphasized it is the whole of the trial evidence that is to be considered.  He explained:
     That said, however, there is no question that the W.(D.) principle applies equally to the reasoning processes of judges and juries. A trial judge will be found to have erred, if upon review of the judge's reasons in light of the trial record, it appears that he or she simply chose between alternative versions offered by the Crown and the defence and, having done so, convicted if the Crown's version was preferred: see, for example, R. v. Mah (2002), 2002 NSCA 99 (CanLII), 207 N.S.R. (2d) 262; N.S.J. No. 349 (Q.L.)(C.A.). Failure to specifically refer to the W.(D.) principle is not fatal on its own in a judge alone trial. The W.(D.) principle is not a magic incantation which trial judges acting as triers of fact must mouth to avoid appellate intervention. The question for the appellate court in a judge alone case is whether, upon consideration of the whole of the judge's decision and the evidence at trial, it appears that the judge did not apply the proper test and therefore did not apply his or her mind to the possibility that despite having rejected the evidence of the respondent, there might nevertheless be a reasonable doubt: R. v. Brown (1994), 1994 CanLII 7609 (NS CA), 132 N.S.R. (2d) 224; Sheppard at para. 65.
[Emphasis added]
        Binnie J., for the Court, in R. v. Sheppard, 2002 SCC 26, expressed the same point—rejected defence evidence can still be considered in the question of whether the Crown has established guilt beyond a reasonable doubt:
     Their problem, clearly, was their inability to assess whether the principles of R. v. W. (D.), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 742, at p. 757, had been applied, namely, whether the trial judge had addressed his mind, as he was required to do, to the possibility that despite having rejected the evidence of the respondent, there might nevertheless, given the peculiar gaps in the Crown's evidence in this case, be a reasonable doubt as to the proof of guilt. The ultimate issue was not whether he believed Ms. Noseworthy or the respondent, or part or all of what they each had to say. The issue at the end of the trial was not credibility but reasonable doubt.
[Emphasis added]
        Quite apart from my view that it is not legal error for rejected defence evidence to be considered in the third step of the W.(D.) framework, the Crown faces an insurmountable problem—the trial judge never actually rejected the respondent’s evidence that any touching had not been intentional.  
        The trial judge clearly had doubts about the credibility of the respondent.  Yet all he actually said was that “Having considered the evidence of Mr. G. carefully I find I do not believe all of the defendant’s evidence” (para. 61; emphasis added). 
        The trial judge in the second step of the W.(D.) framework concluded:
     I also find that Mr. G.'s evidence does not alone raise a reasonable doubt that the touching was unintended for the reasons expressed above. I therefore need to proceed to the third step of W.(D.), an assessment of the evidence as a whole. 
[Emphasis added]
        I have already quoted the trial judge’s concluding paragraphs.  He properly directed himself it was not a question of preference between the complainant’s and respondent’s evidence.  He asked himself, based on all of the evidence, had the Crown proven beyond a reasonable doubt the respondent committed a sexual assault.  
        In light of all of the evidence, the judge found he had a reasonable doubt any intentional touching had occurred.  This factual finding mandated an acquittal.  
        I find no legal errors in the trial judge’s reasons.  As a result, this Court lacks jurisdiction to intervene and I would dismiss the appeal. 
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ns/sc/2023nssc4.html
            This decision is about the delay in bringing this proceeding to trial.  
            On October 25, 2018, a motor vehicle accident occurred in Coxheath, Nova Scotia, resulting in injuries to Jacob Van.  On October 26, 2018, Willow Burkhardt was charged with the offence of impaired driving causing bodily harm, contrary to s. 255(2) of the Criminal Code.  On January 19, 2021, the Crown preferred another indictment, maintaining the charge of impaired driving and adding a charge of dangerous driving causing bodily harm, contrary to s. 249(3) of the Code.  
            The trial of this matter was set to begin on December 5, 2022, and forecast to conclude on December 9, 2022.  The total delay is 49 months and 12 days.  
             The accused brought an application for relief pursuant to s. 11(b) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  Section 11(b)  guarantees the right of the accused to be tried within a reasonable time.  The hearing of this application took place on December 2, 2022.  In a brief oral decision delivered on December 5, 2022, I found a breach of the accused’s s. 11(b) Charter right and stayed the proceedings.  What follows are the reasons for that decision.
Background 
            A review of the background of this matter is necessary.  What follows is a summary of the more significant events.  The record contains more detail. 
            This proceeding began when Burkhardt was charged with an offence contrary to s. 255(2) on October 26, 2018.  On that day, she made her first appearance in provincial court.  She was then without counsel, and requested time to find one.  The matter proceeded through the provincial court in the normal course.  On January 21, 2019, Burkhardt elected trial by judge and jury.  A preliminary inquiry date was set for August 13, 2019.  
            Initial disclosure was provided on November 21, 2018. Supplemental disclosure was provided on November 28, 2018, and January 15, 2019.  Defence counsel advised the Crown on January 16, 2019, that the disc on which disclosure was provided was damaged and could not be read.  Defence counsel followed up on  disclosure on January 24, 2019.  The Crown provided another disclosure disc on January 28, 2019. 
            On February 19, 2019, a focus hearing was adjourned on defence request.  On February 21, 2019, defence counsel wrote to the Crown requesting additional disclosure.  There was a follow-up disclosure request on March 14, 2019, noting that the 911 call had not yet been disclosed (in addition to other disclosure requests).  The Crown reply acknowledged that there was outstanding disclosure.  A focus hearing took place on March 19, 2019, and continued on April 1, 2019.  The defence requested that the 911 caller testify at the preliminary inquiry.  I note here that the main issue emerging in the early stages was identity.   
            The preliminary inquiry was set to begin on August 13, 2019 (almost ten months post charge).  However, the Crown sought an adjournment to remedy  disclosure issues, saying “ … in reviewing the matter in preparation for the preliminary it became clear that there was information that had not been made available and there was still some disclosure issues with respect to that”.  The preliminary inquiry was adjourned to September 5, 2019.
        On that next appearance in provincial court, Burkhardt re-elected to a judge alone trial and waived the preliminary inquiry.  
        On September 23, 2019, the parties appeared in Supreme Court for the first time.  That appearance took place just under 11 months post charge.  The trial was set for February 3 - 6, 2020.  A pre-trial conference report form was due on or before November 1, 2019.  The deadline set was later than normal in response to the parties’ request for enough time to have “meaningful discussions” beforehand.  Resolution and pre-trial conference dates were also set.  I note here that had the matter proceeded as originally scheduled, it would have been completed in less than 16 months.
        Following the first appearance in Supreme Court, defence counsel wrote to the Crown seeking disclosure of a number of items (some were repeated requests), including the 911 call, photographs and blood samples.  The Crown provided supplementary disclosure on November 13 and 22, December 30, 2019, and January 30, 2020.  On January 4, 2020, the Crown provided notice of its intent to call two experts at trial and indicated that CVs for both would be provided.  
        The pre-trial conference form was not filed on time.  Defence counsel completed the form on December 5, 2019, and Crown counsel on January 9, 2020.  Section 4 of the form deals with disclosure and asks whether disclosure is complete.  If not, the form invites particulars of the disclosure issues.  This section was left blank by both parties.
        On January 31, 2020, the parties appeared in Supreme Court.  The Crown sought an adjournment of the pending trial as a result of ongoing disclosure issues.  The Crown explained that the issues related to ambulance (EHS) and medical records, the audio portion of the complainant’s statement to police, as well as “cracks” and a “communication breakdown” between the traffic division of the regional police and the investigating officers.  The Crown indicated, given the “magnitude” of the issues, that it had asked that a senior officer be assigned to coordinate disclosure going forward.  There was no defence waiver.  The adjournment was granted and new trial dates set for November 30 – December 3, 2020, with a pre-trial conference on September 28, 2020.  
        It was after this adjournment that the Covid 19 pandemic struck.  The Supreme Court operated under an essential services model from March 19 to June 15, 2020.  Jury trials remained suspended until September 2021.  The Crown noted that there were significant consequential impacts on the operation of its office.  Although not mentioned, I take notice that the same could likely be said of the police service. However, the Crown offered no evidence of any direct impact of the pandemic on this case.  
        Disclosure issues remained a problem.  In the month preceding the pre-trial conference (now more than eight months post adjournment), defence counsel followed up with the Crown in the absence of any further disclosure.  By this time, new Crown counsel had been assigned to the matter.  The pre-trial conference was moved from September 28, 2020, to October 26, 2020, with no impact on the trial dates.
        The pre-trial conference proceeded on its new date (just under nine months since the adjournment of the previous trial date).  Defence counsel raised the state of disclosure, having received nothing new since the adjournment, and with the new trial date one month away.  In response, the Crown inquired, referring to the previous Crown counsel, “ … so, what was the nature of the disclosure he was referring to? Do you know?”  The Crown went on to admit that he did not have the file with him in court to enable him to address the issue.  There was a general discussion about the witnesses and the nature of the anticipated evidence, including opinion evidence.  Crown counsel was not sure whether expert qualifications had been produced.  As a result of the apparent status, a further pre-trial conference was scheduled for November 16, 2020.
        The following day, defence counsel emailed the Crown noting the “fast approaching” trial date and to “insist upon complete disclosure” 
        The matter returned to Chambers on November 16, 2020.  The Crown had failed to docket the appearance but happened to be in Chambers on another matter.  Crown counsel indicated that he had “a different perspective” than previous Crown counsel and had asked for the police to do further investigation.  EHS records remained outstanding, although they “should have been in the file in the first place”.  No qualifications had been produced for the witnesses the Crown intended to offer opinion evidence.  Defence counsel confirmed this appearance as the first notice of additional investigation and of the possibility of additional witnesses, and remarked that it was “somewhat concerning given it’s two weeks in advance of trial” and “if something comes of it, then I would say that’s going to impinge on trial fairness and the right to make full answer and defence given the short time frame”.  Given the status, a further appearance was scheduled prior to trial.  
        On November 24, 2020, the parties appeared to discuss status.  The Crown expressed concern about readiness.  It had not yet received the missing EHS records and continued to await three statements from the EHS witnesses that “are relevant for our four-day trial”.  The defence expressed concern about outstanding disclosure, including outstanding witness statements that might bear on the central issue of identity.  The Crown indicated for the first time that it was “considering filing a direct Indictment to include a total of three charges …” but “hadn’t decided yet … its something we only started considering today”.  
        I pause here to underscore that the trial was set to begin less than a week later, on November 30, 2020, a date just over 25 months post charge.  Defence counsel raised for the first time that the accused’s Charter rights might be at risk even under a presumptive ceiling.  In my view, it was fair for defence counsel to raise the issue of unreasonable delay even though the matter had not yet reached 30 months from the date of the charge.  At this stage, the matter had already been adjourned twice as a result of Crown disclosure deficiencies (including the preliminary hearing adjournment) and still was not ready for trial.  A further status appearance was scheduled for the following day.  
        On November 25, 2020, the trial dates were adjourned once again at the request of the Crown, on the understanding that new trial dates could be found before the end of the “Jordan timeline”.  The Crown acknowledged the delay was theirs and said, “now we have time and its going to be more fair than if we tried to go ahead Monday”.  New trial dates were scheduled for February 2 – 5, 2021.  
        I pause once again, this time to address a point not raised by counsel, but important to note nonetheless.  
        The Crown appeared on November 25, 2020, with the view that they would be requesting an adjournment if new dates could be found within the “Jordan timeline”.   When that condition was raised, there were no dates available to see a trial completed within 30 months.  After a recess, proposed dates were found on the docket of an outside Justice (Lynch, J.).  Counsel were both available.  But the week of trial time starting November 30, was lost, and an open block of trial time was taken by this matter, now on its third set of trial dates, and therefore not available for another matter.  This, at a point when the court was trying to reschedule all matters that had been adjourned by the pandemic.  
        Beyond that, it must be noted that to get to that point, the court accommodated a move of the pre trial conference from September 28 to October 26, and then added further appearances on November 16, 24, and 25, 2020 (including two appearances on the 25th).  The various inefficiencies and institutional costs are obvious.
        The matter returned for a pre-trial conference before Justice Lynch on January 13, 2021.  Justice Lynch canvassed the issue of expert evidence and was advised that no CV had been produced for the medical opinion.  The Crown indicated that it still had not received the anticipated statements from the EHS witnesses that had resulted in the previous adjournment.  There was no mention of an intention to prefer a new indictment, and therefore no discussion on the procedural or substantive impact of such a step.
        Four business days later (January 19, 2021), nine days before the trial is set to begin for the third time (through no fault of the defence), and 27 months post initial charge, the Crown preferred an indictment against Burkhardt, adding one new charge, and changing the election to judge sitting with jury.   In its oral submission, the Crown acknowledged not having turned its mind to the deemed election.  It is a fact however, that the Court could not have offered a jury trial on the preferred indictment by February 2, 2021.  There is no evidence that the Crown brought the new indictment to the trial judge’s attention in advance of the scheduled trial. 
        On January 29, 2021, defence counsel filed an application to withdraw.  On February 1, 2021, the parties appeared before Lynch, J. who granted the application.    New defence counsel appeared on record the same day but was not aware that a direct indictment had been filed.  Defence counsel indicated that he was “obviously … not in a position to request a re-election”.  He sought one week to obtain instructions from the accused on the issues of election and delay.  The adjournment was granted and the third set of trial dates vacated.  
        The appearance on February 8, 2021, was set over one week as a result of a snowstorm.  The matter returned on February 16, 2021.  With the consent of the Crown, the accused re-elected to trial by judge alone.  The record indicates  Defence counsel stated that the delay was “attributable to my client”.  A voir dire was scheduled for January 5, 2022, with the trial to begin on May 10, 2022.  The additional delay flowing from the adjournment of the trial to May 2022, was 15 months and 5 days.  
        The matter came forward on December 6, 2021, at defence counsel’s request to indicate that Burkhardt was looking for new counsel.  New defence counsel was confirmed on the record by January 4, 2022, and was available for the existing trial dates (less one day).  A status appearance was scheduled for February 1, 2022. Counsel were directed to prepare to discuss the matter in detail on that date.  
        On the status date, defence counsel indicated that he had been provided with disclosure from his client and believed that he had full disclosure.  However, during the discussions that followed it became apparent that some parts were missing.  The Crown suggested that defence counsel inventory what he had for their review.  Defence counsel agreed.  
        The matter came forward for trial on May 10, 2022.  At this point, defence counsel reported he had become aware of the fact that he was missing disclosure.  He was not prepared to proceed without full disclosure.  He understood that the Crown would consent to an adjournment.  However, Burkhardt would not give him instructions to request an adjournment.  She wanted to proceed.  This resulted in a  breakdown between them and counsel asked to be removed from the record.  The request was granted.  
        In the wake of defence counsel’s removal, Burkhardt indicated that she was prepared to proceed without counsel and was ready to start the trial.  In response, the Crown indicated that it wanted to make an application to have counsel appointed for cross-examination of the complainant and would need an adjournment to pursue that application.  The adjournment was granted.  The application was scheduled for June 14, 2022, and a voir dire for July 4, 2022.  The parties were offered trial dates ending July 26, 2022, but the Crown was not available.  The next available dates were December 5 – 9, 2022.  These dates were accepted.  
        It is on this basis that the anticipated conclusion of the trial in this matter was December 9, 2022, resulting in a total delay of 49 months and 12 days.
Issue
         Has the delay in this case resulted in a breach of the applicant’s s. 11(b) Charter right to be tried within a reasonable time? 
Position of the Parties
          The Applicant – Willow Burkhardt
         The applicant says this proceeding has taken too long and has resulted in a breach of her right to be tried in a reasonable time.  She says she has consistently demonstrated a sustained effort to move her case forward to trial.  Nevertheless, the delay here exceeds the presumptive ceiling and the Crown has not demonstrated exceptional circumstances.   She seeks a stay of the proceeding. 
        In her oral argument, the applicant urged consideration of fundamental principles.  Since being charged over 49 months ago, she has been subject to the supervision of the court, including a daily curfew and weekly reporting clauses.  She has not been able to sit in the front seat of a car.  She is a mother whose employment and ability to volunteer have been impacted by this protracted criminal proceeding.  
        Further, the applicant argued consideration of rights impaired by the presumptively unreasonable delay.  She has borne the stress and anxiety of being subject to criminal charges for an extended period.  Evidence which was once fresh and accessible is now degraded or lost.  Successive adjournments due to deficient disclosure did not cure the disclosure issues.  She asks what was accomplished by the delay, given that disclosure shortfalls remain.  Even on this application, the Crown brief was filed late and was only available on the morning of the hearing.  
        All things considered, the applicant argues that the conduct of this proceeding impairs the public reputation of the justice system and exposes her to a set of “second class rights”.
          The Crown
        The Crown says the delay in the proceeding is reasonable.  Once defence delay is subtracted from the total delay, then the net delay falls easily below the presumptive ceiling.  
        The Crown submits that the defence delay in this case is 736 days.  This includes both periods of express or implied waivers, as well as defence conduct causing delay.  The Crown says the successive changes of defence counsel meant that Burkhardt was unavailable to proceed as scheduled.  The Crown relies on the reasons of Moldaver, J. in Jordan, at para. 91 (a section of the reasons dealing with matters falling below the presumptive ceiling):
     Determining whether the time the case has taken markedly exceeds what was reasonably required is not a matter of precise calculation.  Trial judges should not parse each day or month, as has been the common practice since Morin, to determine whether each step was reasonably required.  Instead, trial judges should step back from the minutiae and adopt a bird’s eye view of the case.  All this said, this determination is a question of fact falling well within the expertise of the trial judge (Morin, per Sopinka- J. at pp. 791 – 92).
        The Crown says it was ready to proceed to trial on February 1, 2021, within the presumptive ceiling.  The delays from that point forward resulted from the defence not being ready to proceed because of breakdowns in the relationship between the accused and her lawyers. 
        The Crown also raises the impact of the Covid 19 global pandemic on the workload and scheduling of matters.  It says this amounts to an exceptional circumstance and must be considered.  
        The Crown says the application must be dismissed.
Analysis
         This application involves an alleged breach of the applicant’s Charter guaranteed right to be tried within a reasonable time, found in s. 11(b):
Proceedings in criminal and penal matters
11        Any person charged with an offence has the right
…
(b)        to be tried within a reasonable time;
 
        The framework for assessing delay was transformed by the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Jordan, 2016 SCC 27.  The majority in Jordan underscored the fundamental importance of the right to be tried within a reasonable time given its intersection with liberty and security rights and the right to a fair trial.  Moldaver, Karakastanis, and Brown, JJ, for the majority observed:
       … the Canadian public expects their criminal justice system to bring accused persons to trial expeditiously.  As the months following a criminal charge become years, everyone suffers.  Accused persons remain in a state of uncertainty, often in pre-trial detention.  Victims and families who, in many cases, have suffered tragic losses cannot move forward with their lives.  And the public, whose interest is served by promptly bringing those charged with criminal offences to trial, is justifiably frustrated by watching years pass before a trial occurs.
       An efficient criminal justice system is therefore of utmost importance.  The ability to provide fair trials within a reasonable time is an indicator of the health and proper functioning of the system itself.  The stakes are indisputably high.  
        Jordan established a presumptive ceiling of 30 months for matters heard in superior courts.  If the total delay from the charge to the end of trial (minus defence delay) exceeds the ceiling, then the delay is presumptively unreasonable.  To rebut this presumption, the Crown must establish the presence of exceptional circumstances.  If it cannot, the delay is unreasonable.  The remedy is a stay of proceedings.  
        Jordan called for an end to the “culture of complacency towards delay that has pervaded the criminal justice system”. More is now required as the majority concluded at para. 141:
Broader structural and procedural changes, in addition to day to day efforts, are required to maintain the public’s confidence by delivering justice in a timely manner.  Ultimately, all participants in the justice system must work in concert to achieve speedier trials.  After all, everyone stands to benefit from these efforts.  Timely trials are possible.  More than that, they are constitutionally required.
        The total delay in Jordan was 49.5 months.  In this case, it is 49 months and 12 days. 
        The decisions since Jordan are instructive. Many have focused on the assessment of defence delay and the obligation of the Crown to mitigate delay.  More recently, there has been the issue of pandemic delay.  All of those issues are relevant in this case and area addressed below. 
          Defence Delay
         The Crown says there has been significant delay caused by the defence that must be subtracted from the total delay.  It says a proper accounting of defence delay leads to the conclusion that this matter proceeded reasonably.
        The issue of defence delay was addressed by the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Cody, 2017 SCC 31.  There, the Court held that delay has 2 components: (1) “delay waived by the defence” (explicitly or implicitly); and (2) “delay caused solely by the defence” (para. 26).  In all cases, defence waiver must be informed, clear and unequivocal.  In assessing defence conduct, the goal is to prevent the defence from benefitting from its own “delay causing action or inaction … It applies to any situation where the defence conduct has solely or directly caused the delay” (Jordon at para. 66; Cody at para. 28).  The impugned conduct includes frivolous applications and requests.  It also includes periods when the court and Crown are ready to proceed, but the defence is not (Jordan at para. 64; and Cody at para. 30).  Conversely, if either the Crown or the Court is not ready, there is no defence delay.  
        Cody underscored the culture change that was first called for in Jordan.  The Court urged all justice system participants to prevent and minimize delay.  It cautioned that many practices that were commonplace or tolerated would no longer be viewed as compatible with the right guaranteed by s. 11(b) of the Charter.
        On this point, the applicant relied on two decisions of our Court of Appeal, R. v. Pierce; R. v. Howe, 2021 NSCA 37, and R. v. Ellis, 2020 NSCA 78.  
          Crown Conduct and Mitigation of Delay
        In Ellis, one of the areas of scrutiny was Crown disclosure.  There, the trial judge found that two significant events pushed the proceeding over the Jordan limits.  One of those was the failure of the Crown to disclose important documents.  The trial judge’s conclusions were entitled to deference.  For a similar assessment of Crown disclosure see: R. v. Foroughi-Mobarakeh, 2017 NSSC 100. 
        It is clear that the Crown must not be complicit in defence delay and beyond that, must always seek ways to mitigate various kinds of systemic delay.  This was addressed recently by Coady J. in R. v. Burgess, 2022 NSSC 335: 
  The Court and the Crown must take steps to mitigate delay once it is apparent. The Jordan court stated at paragraph 70:
It is not enough for the Crown, once the ceiling is breached, to point to a past difficulty. It must also show that it took reasonable available steps to avoid and address the problem before the delay exceeded the ceiling. This might include prompt resort to case management processes to seek the assistance of the court, or seeking assistance from the defence to streamline evidence or issues for trial or to coordinate pre-trial applications, or resorting to any other appropriate procedural means. The Crown, we emphasize, is not required to show that the steps it took were ultimately successful — rather, just that it took reasonable steps in an attempt to avoid the delay.
In this case that equates to taking steps to mitigate the effects of the pandemic on delaying the trial.
 This issue was addressed by the Alberta Court of Appeal in R. v. Ghraizi, 2022 ABCA 96 at paragraph 12:
We agree with both the trial judge and summary conviction appeal judge that Crown counsel illness, unavailability due to the assigned Crown’s jury trial extending, and the Covid-19 pandemic were exceptional circumstances. However, identifying an exceptional circumstance is not sufficient. As the Supreme Court of Canada instructs us in Jordan, at paras 74-75, once the ceiling is exceeded. “the focus should be on whether the Crown made reasonable efforts to respond and to conclude the trial under the ceiling” and that “the Crown must always be prepared to mitigate the delay resulting from a discrete exceptional circumstance. So too must the justice system.”
        In Burgess, Justice Coady concluded that the Crown had failed to keep an eye on the delay and prioritize the case as required by Jordan:
    The prosecution of Ms. Burgess is precisely the kind of case that drove the Jordan ceilings. It was a straightforward case without evidentiary issues.  It only required one-half day of court time. The section 11(b) motion was argued in 1 ½ hours. There is no reason why this trial and motion could not be heard in one day.  Further, I am of the view that the trial should have proceeded on July 6, 2020; eleven months post charge.  The Crown’s strict adherence to the expert notice requirements was not consistent with the principles in Jordan. The record indicates that after the July 6, 2020 trial cancellation complacency set in and nothing was done to address delay. There were various Judges and Crowns involved throughout which resulted in a lack of continuity …
        I find important guidance in the reasons in Burgess and the authorities relied upon by Justice Coady.  
        COVID – 19 Pandemic Delay
        More recently, there has been much ink dedicated to assessing pandemic delay.  
        Broadly speaking, the pandemic has been viewed as an exceptional circumstance and the associated delay classified as a discreet event permitting the relevant time period to be subtracted from the total delay.  The emerging proviso is  that pandemic related events must be the cause of the delay and the Crown must address its efforts to mitigate (see R. v. Sandhu, 2022 ONSC 3910, O.J. No. 2990, at paras 38-41, and the cases cited therein, R. v. Langford, 2022 ONSC 4542, O.J. No. 3566, at para. 23, R. v. Simmons, 2020 ONSC 7209, O.J. No. 5183 at paras 59-77 and R. v. Hinterberger, 2022 ONSC 4860, O.J. No. 3816 at paras 48-50 and 54-59). 
        In this case, there was no evidence that a specific pandemic-related event caused a period of delay.  Notwithstanding, the Crown relied upon the general impact of the pandemic on its ability to operate.  Its written submission on the point was brief:
18.       It is important to recognize that during the period between March 15, 2020 and continuing into 2021, COVID-19 threw all scheduling of court matters into disarray.  Trials were adjourned several times during this period requiring extensive work in calling off witnesses, and subpoenaing them for new trial dates, corresponding and meeting with victims to explain what was happening.  This was followed by further adjournments for the same reason so the work described above had to be repeated on every adjourned file.  These were certainly exceptional times.  
        This point was repeated in oral submissions.  However, no authorities were provided to support the submission that the general impact of exceptional circumstances can be considered in isolation.  In my view, the authorities establish that there must be some nexus between the COVID-19 pandemic and the case specific delay being considered.  Moreover, the Crown must demonstrate its effort to mitigate that delay.  
        With all of this guidance in mind, I turn now to my findings and conclusion in the present case.
          General Observations - Context
          I begin with a number of general observations about this proceeding that are important as context.  
        First, I am mindful that the entirety of this case was conducted after the decision in Jordan.  The applicable principles were clearly established and the call for culture change was widely recognized.  
        Second, the total delay in this matter is lengthy – over 49 months.  And I am mindful that this quantum of delay is for a proceeding with no preliminary inquiry, its first appearance in Supreme Court in less than 12 months, and its first set of trial dates within 15 months.  This efficiency notwithstanding some defence waivers and several changes in defence counsel. This matter started out with the promise of answering Jordan’s call for culture change.    
        Third, in my view, there was a reasonable opportunity to see the trial of this matter concluded before the Covid-19 pandemic.  The first trial dates were before the pandemic began to impact the operation of the Supreme Court of Nova Scotia.  As we know, those dates were lost to a Crown adjournment.  The second set of trial dates was assigned prior to the impact of the pandemic.  This meant (in Cape Breton District scheduling) that the dates set had priority over matters adjourned as a result of the pandemic.  
        Fourth, there is no question that scheduling became more challenging after the second Crown adjournment.  Notwithstanding, the Crown was fortunate on the second adjournment as unexpected dates became available with an outside judge (one who was not part of the regular docket in the Cape Breton District).  The third set of trial dates were scheduled to proceed in just under 30 months.  This was the result of the system responding to the needs of a case that required priority.  
        Fifth, as in Burgess, I find that the present case is the kind of case that Jordan was designed to prevent.  It is not complex in terms of issues or evidence.   It is an identity case.  One recognizes that things do not always unfold as expected and unforeseen issues arise.   The presumptive ceilings allow time for such things.  In  this case, there was a systemic disclosure issue identified early on.  There was also a reassignment of Crown counsel after the first adjournment.  I find that the expectations following Jordan called for a better response to these issues.  A matter with disclosure issues, an adjournment, and a change of Crown counsel should attract an enhanced priority and a sense of urgency.  
        Sixth, I find that the issue of Crown disclosure unduly plagued this proceeding.  It was identified as an issue early on.  The first preliminary inquiry date on August 13, 2019, was adjourned because of disclosure issues.   Later, the first trial dates were adjourned with the same issues  - characterized as “cracks” that were to be addressed going forward – but nevertheless became an overriding issue.  Nothing changed by the second set of trial dates resulting in another Crown adjournment.  I observe that this was not the kind of case that one would anticipate any disclosure issues let alone significant, protracted and apparently systemic issues.  
        Finally, I note that the Crown takes the view that they were finally ready to proceed to trial by February 1, 2021, a point in time still under the presumptive ceiling.  I disagree with this assessment and further believe it somewhat misses the point.  The focus should be on when it should have been ready.  In my view, with appropriate mitigation efforts, the Crown should have been ready to proceed no later than November 30, 2020.  
        It is with this perspective that I address some of the specific issues raised in this case and then summarize my conclusion on delay. 
          Specific Conclusions  
        There are three time periods that bear require specific comment based on the positions of the parties. 
        The first period is from the charge to the first set of trial dates (October 26, 2018, to February 3-6, 2020).  This is a span of about 15 months.  Given the nature of this case, it is reasonable to think that it could have concluded as initially scheduled.  It did not, because of a Crown adjournment required by disclosure issues.  I note here, as I did above, that disclosure issues first began with a damaged disc in January 2019.  Disclosure was the focus of discussion between counsel throughout this period.  It resulted in the adjournment of the preliminary inquiry on August 13, 2019.  The Crown then had until the first set of trial dates on February 3, 2020, (a period of almost 6 months) to remedy the issues and be ready for trial. 
        I note in this first period that the defence explicitly waived two periods of delay, totalling 63 days.  When this is subtracted from the total delay, the net delay remains significant, at just over 47 months.
        The second period focused on by counsel began with the filing of the preferred indictment on January 19, 2021, followed shortly thereafter by the adjournment of the trial dates beginning on February 2, 2021.  It is here that the Crown took a step that bears particular scrutiny under Jordan – the decision to prefer a direct indictment with a new charge more than 26 months post charge and less than two weeks prior to trial (the third set of trial dates).  
        Decisions to prefer indictments are typically taken to ensure that matters move forward expeditiously.  Here, the proceeding made its way to the Supreme Court at a reasonable pace, albeit with emerging systemic disclosure issues.  This was followed by two Crown adjournments as a consequence of chronic disclosure issues.  The delay to that point was almost entirely on the Crown.  
        The step to prefer the new indictment had the potential to cause further delay given the deemed election to trial by judge and jury.  There was no possibility that the court could provide a jury trial on such late notice.  Moreover, the added charge needed review.  The defence was entitled to a fair opportunity to review the procedural and substantive impact of the new indictment.  The parties were then in the midst of preparing for the trial starting with a voir dire with imminent deadlines to file briefs.  There was not enough time to prepare for trial even if the accused wished to re-elect.  In my view, the timing of the filing of the new indictment made a further adjournment inevitable.  
        The Crown’s response on this issue was forthright – counsel had not considered the election issue.  The Crown view was that the added charge did not change the evidentiary landscape, nor would it extend the trial beyond what was already booked.  No harm, no foul.  The assumption was that the matter was scheduled to proceed by judge alone trial and that it would do so.  But once the decision was made to prefer the indictment, it required the accused to re-elect if there was to be any hope that the trial would proceed as scheduled.  That did not happen.
        On the day before the trial was set to start, there was a breakdown in the relationship between Burkhardt and her counsel.  She had new defence counsel on the record on the same day previous counsel was removed.    She moved very quickly to remedy her situation.  Her new counsel acknowledged no awareness of the new indictment.  He needed time to obtain instructions and asked for a week.  
        I find the decision to prefer the indictment at that point in the proceeding is a risk that the Crown must bear.  It could have mitigated or eliminated this risk by taking this step much earlier in the proceeding.  It had already been granted two adjournments.  Aside from the deemed election issue, it is reasonable that any defence counsel would need some time to absorb the procedural implications, obtain instructions, and prepare to address a new charge.  In this context, the late change of defence counsel was immaterial.  There was not enough time for any defence counsel to prepare.  The accused has the right to reasonable preparation time as part and parcel of the right to a fair trial. 
        I find this period is not deductible from the total delay as it is not defence delay.  Under Jordan and Cody, unless the court and the Crown are ready and defence unavailable, it is not defence delay.  I come to this conclusion recognizing that defence counsel expressly waived delay.  In the circumstances, I do not consider this an informed waiver, and if it was, it was with the knowledge that the trial dates were already gone and the waiver added nothing.  
        The total delay including this period remains at just over 47 months.
        The final time period in contention was that flowing from the withdrawal of defence counsel on May 10, 2022.  This resulted in a period of delay from May 13, 2022, to December 9, 2022 ( just under seven months).  The Crown argued that this was defence delay.  I note that the breakdown between counsel and client was about disclosure.  Defence counsel realized on the eve of trial that he did not have full disclosure.  He did not want to proceed.  Burkhardt insisted on proceeding.  A breakdown followed.  
        To some degree, this issue was foreshadowed in previous appearances beginning with defence counsel’s first appearance on the record on January 4, 2022.  That day, when the issue of disclosure arose, the Crown advised defence counsel to obtain disclosure from his predecessor.  The Court scheduled a status date for February 1, 2022, urged the Crown to assist new counsel to come up to speed as quickly as possible, and directed the parties to be prepared to discuss the matter in detail on the next appearance. 
        On the status date, defence counsel indicated that he had obtained disclosure from his client but it became apparent that he did not have full disclosure.  The Crown response was to ask for an inventory so that they would not have to recopy things defence counsel already had.  Defence counsel agreed.  It seems however that this agreement was not followed and the disclosure issue persisted, resulting in the solicitor-client breakdown.  
        In my view, this is defence delay that must be deducted from the total delay.  Defence counsel was aware that he did not have complete disclosure and did not take steps he agreed to take on the record to remedy this situation.  The Crown relied on the agreement of defence counsel to a disclosure process.  I deduct a further seven months from the total delay for a net delay of just over 40 months.  
        A net delay of 40 months is well over the Jordon ceiling and results in a presumption that the delay is unreasonable.  I am not persuaded that any exceptional circumstances exist to rebut the presumption.  Here, I consider the impact of the pandemic which is clearly a discreet and exceptional event.  But there is no basis to say that it had any specific impact causing delay in this case.  
        As the Crown argued, the pandemic had a systemic impact on its operations.  Without a doubt, after March of 2020, the pandemic had an impact on all justice system participants.  In the required assessment, the Crown must demonstrate steps taken to mitigate the impact.  There was evidence that such steps were taken.  But the context for these steps was that the protracted delays to that point were the responsibility of the Crown an not the result of the pandemic.   This is a case that should have concluded before the pandemic struck.  
        In the end, I find that the delay in this case was not the result of the pandemic or defence delay.  It was the result of a combination of chronic disclosure issues and the late filing of a direct indictment.  The cumulative impact of these issues resulted in unreasonable delay. 
Conclusion
         As a result of the foregoing, I conclude that the delay in this proceeding is unreasonable and a breach of Burkhardt’s s. 11(b) Charter right.  
        A stay of proceedings is the remedy and is entered on the on the record.  
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ns/sc/2023nssc2.html
            This is an appeal by John Archer of his sentence for sexual assault. He was convicted of having committed the offences on or about February 25th, 2018 at or near Westphal, Nova Scotia, contrary to s. 271 of the Criminal Code, R.S.C, 1985, c. C-46. The victim was K.H. I am hearing this matter in my capacity as a Summary Conviction Appeal Court Judge.   
            His Honour, Justice Marc Chisholm of the Nova Scotia Provincial Court, in a sentencing decision rendered on July 23, 2021, imposed a suspended sentence for a term of 15 months which included various reporting conditions. A mandatory SOIRA order was also imposed for a period of ten years. 
            Mr. Archer has raised one ground of appeal.  He contends that the Sentencing Judge committed an error in principle by placing an undue emphasis on denunciation and deterrence. The emphasis, he argues, resulted in an improper sentence.  He further contends that this Court should substitute a Conditional Discharge for the suspended sentence, with the same ancillary conditions that Judge Chisholm had imposed.  
Overview of the Facts
            The facts found by the Sentencing Judge note that the parties met on “Tinder”, which is a dating application. Their interactions were initially brief, and they stopped communicating once the Complainant had entered into another relationship. Later on they connected on Tinder and resumed their communication. On February 24, 2018, the Complainant invited the Appellant to meet her at a location in Cole Harbour. The Appellant met her there.  
            The next morning, the Appellant and Complainant talked on the phone and discussed their plans for the day. The Complainant was planning to meet a friend in Halifax around noon to look at prom dresses. They agreed to meet for a walk before she was due to meet her friend, and the Appellant agreed to drive the Complainant to the event afterward.
            The Appellant picked her up at her home around 10:00 a.m.  He drove her to Shubie Park. There were a lot of people at the park.  The Appellant parked on the side of the road outside the parking area while they decided what to do. While parked he leaned over to kiss her, but she did not kiss him and pulled back. The Appellant then drove to Spider Lake Park. There was no one around. He told her about a look-off point at the top of the hill.  It was cold out, and the Complainant was only wearing a dress, as well as a sweater. The two went to the top of the hill. At the top of the hill the Appellant kissed the Complainant, hugged her, lifted her off the ground, and touched her buttocks and one of her breasts.  During this contact, the Complainant squirmed to get out of his grasp. She complained about being cold, and asked to go back to the car. 
            Shortly after their return to the car, the Appellant asked her if she wanted to touch his penis. The Complainant clearly stated that she did not. The Appellant ignored the refusal and took hold of her hand and wrist with the specific intent of putting her hand on his penis. She pulled her hand away and he became angry. He told her that he was not her chauffeur, and ordered her to get out of the car. He then relented and agreed to drop her off at a bus stop, after which they did not meet again.
Issues:
            I would frame the issues this way:
(i)           Did the Trial Judge commit an error in principle by improperly balancing the factors and principles that inform a fit and proper sentence? 
(ii)          If yes, did that error have an impact on the sentence that the Appellant received?
            I note that the Appellant, in his oral submissions, conceded that he no longer contends that the sentence is demonstrably unfit. 
Analysis
          (i)      Did the Trial Judge commit an error in principle by improperly balancing the factors and principles that inform a fit and proper sentence?
        Whether an error in principle has been committed by the Trial Judge is a question of law.  As a consequence, it is to be reviewed by this Court on the standard of correctness. Even if I agree that such an error was committed, I may only intervene if the error had an impact on the sentence itself: 
26.  As this Court confirmed in Lacasse, an appellate court can only intervene to vary a sentence if (1) the sentence is demonstrably unfit (para. 41), or (2) the sentencing judge made an error in principle that had an impact on the sentence (para. 44). Errors in principle include an error of law, a failure to consider a relevant factor, or erroneous consideration of an aggravating or mitigating factor. The weighing or balancing of factors can form an error in principle "[o]nly if by emphasizing one factor or by not giving enough weight to another, the trial judge exercises his or her discretion unreasonably" (R. v. McKnight (1999), 1999 CanLII 3717 (ON CA), 135 C.C.C. (3d) 41 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 35, cited in Lacasse, at para. 49). Not every error in principle is material: an appellate court can only intervene if it is apparent from the trial judge's reasons that the error had an impact on the sentence (Lacasse, at para. 44). If an error in principle had no impact on the sentence, that is the end of the error in principle analysis and appellate intervention is justified only if the sentence is demonstrably unfit. (R. v. Friesen, 2020 SCC 9)
        At the outset, it is a fair observation that the Trial Judge did turn his mind to whether a conditional discharge was an appropriate result. In so doing, he considered the principles set out in s. 730(1) of the Criminal Code, and also the guidance provided by R. v. Fallofield (1973), 1973 CanLII 1412 (BC CA), 13 CCC (2d) 450 (BCCA). 
        In the course of this analysis he also considered the circumstances surrounding the commission of the offences, the impact of the ongoing psychological trauma sustained by the Complainant, the accused’s expressions of remorse, as well as his attitude toward the offence. He carefully considered the impact upon the accused himself, in the aftermath of the offence, as well as his relative youth.
        Section 730(1) reads as follows:
Conditional and absolute discharge
730(1).  Where an accused, other than an organization, pleads guilty to or is found guilty of an offence, other than an offence for which a minimum punishment is prescribed by law or an offence punishable by imprisonment for fourteen years or for life, the court before which the accused appears may, if it considers it to be in the best interests of the accused and not contrary to the public interest, instead of convicting the accused, by order direct that the accused be discharged absolutely or on the conditions prescribed in a probation order made under subsection 731(2).
        Fallofield tells us that in order for a discharge to be in the “best interests of the accused” s/he must be of good prior character, such that it is not necessary to enter a conviction against the accused to specifically deter the commission of future offences. Also, it must be established that the entry of a conviction may have significant adverse repercussions on the Appellant.
        The requirement in s. 730(1) that a discharge not be “contrary to the public interest” requires the Court to consider the need for general deterrence which is informed by such factors as the seriousness of the offence, the prevalence of the offence in the community, an analysis of aggravating and mitigating factors and whether, in a broad sense, a discharge would be consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing.
        In the course of his reasons, the Sentencing Judge noted:
In relation to the first requirement for the granting of a discharge the accused in this case was just 19 years of age at the time of the commission of the offences. He had no prior convictions. His presentence report is very positive. I find that the accused is a person of good character. In this case the accused incurred significant consequences resulting from the discharge and subsequent criminal proceedings. Those consequences and his expressions of remorse and his expression of empathy for the harm he caused the victim I find substantially address the need for specific deterrence, substantially but not completely. 
        The accused’s evidence at trial and his comments to the author of the pre-sentence report were to the effect that he had “misread the signs”, thus misreading the Complainant’s wishes. By way of contrast, the Court’s finding had been that, while in his vehicle at Spider Lake, the accused ignored the Complainant’s expressed wishes, which she clearly communicated to him by saying “no”. This caused the Sentencing Judge to question whether he had fully accepted responsibility for his behaviour.
        Judge Chisholm also alluded to defence counsel’s characterization of the harm that Mr. Archer would sustain, career-wise, if a conviction were entered. Counsel had referred (at the sentencing hearing) to his client’s desire to return to university to pursue a career in nursing. He argued that, upon completing that education, if Mr. Archer were to attempt to become a Registered Nurse, a criminal record check would be required, and that a conviction that may prevent him from being employed in the profession. 
        Judge Chisholm observed that this submission was at odds with what the accused had told the author of the pre-sentence report. He had stated at the time that he intended to enter community college to become an electrician.
        Often, a lack of clarity in a Pre-Sentence Report may be addressed by submissions made at the time of the sentencing itself. Certainly, counsel did have the opportunity to make those submissions and, clearly, they did not assuage the Sentencing Judge’s concerns in relation to that particular aspect of the matter.
        Judge Chisholm concluded his analysis of the section 730(1) factors by determining that the evidence had failed to satisfy him that the accused may suffer any repercussions, from the entry of a conviction, that would not occur, in any event, with the entry of a discharge. In other words, he felt that the accused’s situation would be the same, career-wise, whether a discharge or a conviction was imposed.
        Judge Chisholm then turned his attention to the second branch of the test set out in s. 730(1). This is what he had to say about it:
The second requirement for the granting of a discharge requires the court to find that the granting of a discharge would not be contrary to public interest. Sexual assault involves violation of a woman’s sexual integrity with a potential significant psychological harm to the victim. In this case such harm has occurred. 
        The Court did not view the offence as one of impulse. The evidence persuaded Judge Chisholm that the accused contrived to get the Complainant alone in an isolated place for the purpose of touching her in a sexual manner. Further, the Court viewed the accused’s reaction of anger (rather than an apology) in response to the Complainant’s refusal to touch his penis, as inconsistent with his claim that he merely misread her wishes.
        In concluding that a discharge would be contrary to the public interest, the Sentencing Judge identified his concern that the granting of discharge would not adequately address the need for denunciation and deterrence of this type of offence. Specifically, Judge Chisholm observed:
The sexual touching of a woman in circumstances such as this is a criminal offence. The accused’s touching of the victim’s breasts and buttocks was not a trivial matter. The upset and fear that he caused the victim was significant and led to significant long-term psychological harm. For those reasons, the application for a conditional discharge is denied.
        His Honour did not stop there. Since he had ruled out a conditional sentence as a fit and appropriate one in these circumstances, he went on to consider what type of sentence was necessary.
        In doing so, the Trial Judge did not view the individual circumstances of the Appellant in isolation or a vacuum. Among other things, and as we have seen, he specifically considered the fact that Mr. Archer was a young man and one of good character. He conducted a detailed analysis of the evidence with respect to Mr. Archer’s career plans and concluded that he was not satisfied that they had been firmed up at present. He also considered the apparent depth of Mr. Archer’s insight into the seriousness of his conduct. 
        Judge Chisholm considered the prevalence of sexual assaults in the community. He was ideally positioned to do so.  He also considered the trauma sustained by the Complainant, the accused’s demonstrable level of responsibility, the nature of the conduct itself, and the caselaw.
        There is no question that the elements of denunciation and deterrence, both specific and general, played a prominent role in Judge Chisholm’s decision. But this is not to say that he erred because of this.
        Indeed, the Sentencing Judge was required to give significant consideration to these factors.  I refer to Friesen once again:
89. All forms of sexual violence, including sexual violence against adults, are morally blameworthy precisely because they involve the wrongful exploitation of the victim by the offender -- the offender is treating the victim as an object and disregarding the victim's human dignity (see R. v. Mabior, 2012 SCC 47, [2012] 2 S.C.R. 584, at paras. 45 and 48). As L'Heureux-Dubé J. reasoned in L. (D.O.), "the occurrence of child sexual abuse is one intertwined with the sexual abuse of all women" precisely because both forms of sexual offences involve the sexual objectification of the victim (p. 441). Courts must give proper weight in sentencing to the offender's underlying attitudes because they are highly relevant to assessing the offender's moral blameworthiness and to the sentencing objective of denunciation (Benedet, at p. 310; Hajar, at para. 67).
        Moreover, I observe that Judge Chisholm’s comments about the prevalence of sexual assault in the community align with those of the Supreme Court of Canada’s earlier comments in Friesen:
54.  The enactment of Bill C-15 also illustrates how Parliament sought to protect children's equality interest. Parliament enacted Bill C-15 following the reports of the Committee on Sexual Offences Against Children and Youths and the Special Committee on Pornography and Prostitution. Both reports emphasized the need for any reform of the scheme of sexual offences against children to guarantee children the equal protection of their interests in autonomy, dignity and physical and sexual integrity (Badgley Committee, vol. 1, at pp. 39 and 292; Canada, Special Committee on Pornography and Prostitution, Pornography and Prostitution in Canada: Report of the Special Committee on Pornography and Prostitution (1985), vol. 1, at p. 24 ("Fraser Committee"); Fraser Committee, vol. 2, at p. 563). Both reports also concluded that the failures of the existing scheme of sexual offences against children disproportionately affected girls and young women because they were disproportionately victimized (Badgley Committee, vol. 1, at p. 180; Fraser Committee, vol. 2, at p. 573). In his speech introducing Bill C-15, then Minister of Justice Ray Hnatyshyn highlighted the conclusions of both reports. He referred to statistics from the report of the Committee on Sexual Offences Against Children and Youths showing that children are disproportionately vulnerable to sexual offences and that girls and young women are disproportionately victimized relative to boys. The Minister emphasized that the reform of the scheme of sexual offences against children would guarantee children "the equal degree of protection of the law" and provide them "more complete protection ... from all manner of sexual abuse" (House of Commons Debates, vol. 1, 2nd Sess., 33rd Parl., November 4, 1986, at p. 1037).
 
55.  These developments are connected to a larger shift, as society has come to understand that the focus of the sexual offences scheme is not on sexual propriety but rather on wrongful interference with sexual integrity. As Professor Elaine Craig notes, "This shift from focusing on sexual propriety to sexual integrity enables greater emphasis on violations of trust, humiliation, objectification, exploitation, shame, and loss of self-esteem rather than simply, or only, on deprivations of honour, chastity, or bodily integrity (as was more the case when the law's concern had a greater focus on sexual propriety)" (Troubling Sex: Towards a Legal Theory of Sexual Integrity (2012), at p. 68).
56        This emphasis on personal autonomy, bodily integrity, sexual integrity, dignity, and equality requires courts to focus their attention on emotional and psychological harm, not simply physical harm. Sexual violence against children can cause serious emotional and psychological harm that, as this Court held in R. v. McCraw, 1991 CanLII 29 (SCC), [1991] 3 S.C.R. 72, "may often be more pervasive and permanent in its effect than any physical harm" (p. 81).
        In sum, the Sentencing Judge considered all of the circumstances holistically, and determined that it was not appropriate that a conditional discharge be granted.  Another judge might have come to a different conclusion. Certainly a conditional discharge was within the range of outcomes that might have been imposed in a case of this nature. However, it bears emphasis that this Court may only consider intervention if an error in principle which impacted the sentence has been committed. I cannot gratuitously substitute another decision for the one that Judge Chisholm has imposed. The Sentencing Judge is entitled to deference in these circumstances. 
          (ii)     If yes, did that error have an impact on the sentence that the Appellant received?
        Even if I had concluded that the Sentencing Judge had committed an error in principle, I would not have not been satisfied that it had any impact upon the sentence. In particular, after balancing the aggravating and mitigating factors he concluded that a fit and proper sentence did not require a period of incarceration in these circumstances, as has already been observed.
        Among other things, it is quite obvious that he paid proper attention to the principle of restraint and, in particular, he indicated (page 28) that:
…the sentence must be the least restrictive sentence while being consistent with the fundamental purpose, principles and objectives of sentencing.
        Judge Chisholm then went on to discuss the youth of the accused, although he noted that the Complainant was even younger. He also referenced the significant consequences which the accused had sustained in the aftermath of the charges and conviction. He expressly considered all of that. 
        Defence counsel argued that the decision is inconsistent with such decisions as R. v. J.W., (2010) NSPC 40. With respect, the Sentencing Judge’s findings in this case distinguish it from J.W., which was a situation where the accused was found to have acted on impulse. He expressly noted elements in this case suggestive of planning and orchestration. Another significant distinguishing factor, was that the Complainant in J.W. did not sustain physical or psychological harm for any appreciable length of time. In this case, the Complainant clearly did. All of these things played into Judge Chisholm’s decision as he decided upon the appropriate sentence.
        The Sentencing Judge was thorough in his analysis of all of the principles that inform a fit and proper sentence. He gave appropriate attention to all, and the emphasis that he gave to denunciation and deterrence was in accord with the decided caselaw. Moreover, it was tethered to the evidence and the findings of fact which had been earlier made. 
Conclusion
        With respect, I can find no error in principle inherent in Judge Chisholm’s reasoning. It follows that I have not been persuaded that the sentence of 15 months with reasonably light conditions, with the mandated SOIRA order, is the product of an undue or improper emphasis given by the Sentencing Judge to one or more of the sentencing principles that he was required to consider. As a consequence, the appeal is dismissed.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ns/sc/2023nssc9.html
            Early in the evening of October 22, 2020, Zachery Grosse and Nicholas Rhyno met, for the first time, at about 6:24:40 p.m., in apartment 12 on the 3rd floor of 24 Primrose Street in North Dartmouth where Mr. Grosse lived with his girlfriend, Kaila Ford.  It is possible to pinpoint the precise time of this initial encounter (and many other events relevant to this case) because security cameras installed both outside 24 Primose Street and within the apartment building recorded the event on video which also captured the time of day.[1]
            Within less than a minute of meeting one another, the two men would square off against one another in the hallway just outside Mr. Grosse’s apartment door.  By this time, Mr. Grosse had retrieved a switchblade.  But he did not know that Mr. Rhyno also carried a knife.  Mr. Rhyno’s knife was concealed in his right coat pocket.  Mr. Rhyno struck first.  He stabbed Mr. Grosse in the neck and opened up a wound in a major blood vessel.  Blood began gushing from Mr. Grosse.  The knife fight continued and Mr. Grosse suffered other wounds.  But this initial cut proved fatal.  Despite the efforts of first responders and E.R. medical professionals, Mr. Grosse succumbed to his wounds and died in the early hours of October 23, 2020. 
            By verdict rendered September 23, 2022, a jury found Nicholas Rhyno guilty of manslaughter contrary to section 236(b) of the Criminal Code in the death of Zachery Grosse. The jury considered the charge of second degree murder but found Mr. Rhyno not guilty of that offence.
            I must now determine a fit, proper and just sentence for Mr. Rhyno’s crime. 
CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE OFFENCE
            It is necessary to outline the materials facts of the crime so as to better ensure the sentence for that crime is fit and just.  However, this was a jury trial.  Both the common law and section 649 of the Criminal Code recognize the sanctity of jury secrecy which, in turn, prohibits the Court from receiving information regarding jury deliberations – including the specific facts of the crime which jury members relied upon when reaching their  verdict.  That information must be held within the strictest of confidence.  The underlying rationale includes a desire to protect the integrity of jury deliberations and shield the jury from outside influences (R v Pan, 2001 SCC 42).
            As such,  where a jury finds an accused guilty, the sentencing judge is compelled to make certain factual determinations in the absence of input from the jury as to the facts which they used to support conviction.  In R v Ferguson, 2008 SCC 6 (CanLII), 1 S.C.R. 96, the Supreme Court of Canada described the sentencing judge’s obligation to make factual determinations: 
The sentencing judge therefore must do his or her best to determine the facts necessary for sentencing from the issues before the jury and from the jury's verdict. This may not require the sentencing judge to arrive at a complete theory of the facts; the sentencing judge is required to make only those factual determinations necessary for deciding the appropriate sentence in the case at hand.
[at paragraph 16.  See also paragraphs 17 – 18]
            This comment from the Supreme Court of Canada aligns with section 724(2) of the Criminal Code which states:
Where the court is composed of a judge and jury, the court 
(a) shall accept as proven all facts, express or implied, that are essential to the jury’s verdict of guilty; and 
(b) may find any other relevant fact that was disclosed by evidence at the trial to be proven, or hear evidence presented by either party with respect to that fact.
            As a necessary corollary to the sentencing judge’s obligation to only make factual determinations necessary to impose a sentence for the particular crime committed, the sentencing judge may not make such additional factual determinations that are inconsistent with the jury’s verdict, or implicitly rejected by the jury having regard to the verdict (R v Landry, 2016 NSCA 53 at paragraph 49).
            The following circumstances surrounding the offence facts were developed with these principles in mind, based on the evidence before the Court.
        Zachery Grosse lived with his girlfriend, Kaila Ford, in apartment 12, on the 3rd floor of an apartment building located at 24 Primrose Street in North Dartmouth.
        During the late afternoon of October 22, 2020, Zachery Grosse and Kaila Ford were drinking and smoking cannabis in the apartment of their friend, Stevie Saulnier.  Stevie Saulnier lived in an apartment one floor below Zachery Grosse and Kaila Ford (i.e. on the 2nd floor of the same building).   Nothing happened that afternoon to suggest imminent danger or trouble. 
        At about this same time, across the harbour in Halifax, Nicholas Rhyno was picking up Kaila Ford’s sister, Taylor Forrest.  They were driving in Mr. Rhyno’s car and they were on their first date.  Here again, there was nothing to suggest imminent danger or trouble.
        However, the two couples’ paths would soon intersect and that is where trouble began.
        Earlier that same day, Ms. Forrest was texting with her sister, Ms. Ford.  They decided that Ms. Forrest and Mr. Rhyno would meet for drinks at Ms. Ford and Mr. Grosse’s apartment.  
        The video footage from security cameras arrayed outside 24 Primrose Street show Mr. Rhyno and Ms. Forrest arriving by car at 6:18:18 p.m.  Ms. Forrest texted Ms. Ford to say they arrived.  Unfortunately, Ms. Ford did not immediately see the text and she did not know that her sister arrived with Mr. Rhyno in tow.  Worse, Ms. Ford had not told Mr. Grosse about the plan to spend an evening drinking with Ms. Forrest and Mr. Rhyno.  Pausing here, it bears repeating that Mr. Rhyno was a stranger to Mr. Grosse. 
        Mr. Rhyno parked his car in the parking lot located to the rear of the apartment building.  He and Ms. Forrest walked into the apartment building.  Internal security cameras picked up their entrance and followed Mr. Rhyno and Ms. Forrest up a set of stairs to the 3rd floor.  Mr. Grosse and Ms. Ford’s apartment door was unlocked.
        Ms. Forrest and Mr. Rhyno entered apartment 12, which was empty except for a dog named Max.  Ms. Ford and Ms. Grosse were still socializing one floor below, in Stevie Saulnier’s apartment.  
        Out of habit, Mr. Rhyno closed and locked the apartment door behind him.
        Less than 5 minutes later, at about 6:23:09 p.m., Mr. Grosse walked up the stairs to his apartment 12, but the door was now locked.  He still did not know Ms. Forrest and Mr. Rhyno were there for drinks.  Mr. Grosse started to return to the second floor when Ms. Forrest opened the apartment door.  Mr. Grosse turned quickly.  This would have been the first time Mr. Grosse discovered that Ms. Forrest was visiting, but he still did not know Ms. Forrest was accompanied by Mr. Rhyno.
        Mr. Grosse returned to Stevie Saulnier’s apartment on the 2nd floor and told Ms. Ford that her sister was in their apartment.  
        Ms. Ford quickly left Stevie Saulnier’s apartment and walked back up to the 3rd floor to speak with her sister.  
        A minute or two later, Mr. Grosse followed Ms. Ford.  He re-entered his apartment at 6:24:40 p.m..  At that moment, he and Mr. Rhyno met for the first time.  
        Mr. Grosse was upset and agitated to find Ms. Forrest and a stranger (Mr. Rhyno) in his apartment.  Ms. Ford said that Mr. Grosse was “freaking out”.  Ms. Forrest and Mr. Rhyno similarly testified that Mr. Grosse was furious.  
        Mr. Grosse spoke accusingly towards Ms. Forrest.  He then turned to Mr. Rhyno who was sitting on the couch.  Mr. Grosse asked Mr. Rhyno: “Who the fuck are you?”  
        This was a turning point.  While I agree Mr. Grosse introduced an elevated level of aggression, Mr. Rhyno was not inclined to defuse or de-escalate the situation.  Instead, Mr. Rhyno rose from the couch to ask Mr. Grosse if there was a problem.
        This initial exchange between Mr. Rhyno and Mr. Grosse lasted only a few moments but the atmosphere deteriorated rapidly and soon got out of hand.  
        Within 24 seconds of arriving at apartment 12, Mr. Grosse concluded that Mr. Rhyno was not leaving the apartment.  Mr. Grosse announced something along the lines of “You’re not going to leave?  Watch this.” Mr. Grosse then stormed out of the apartment.  The security cameras capture Mr. Grosse jogging down the stairs to the 2nd floor and re-entering Stevie Saulnier’s apartment.  He was there to retrieve a knife.
        There is evidence that Mr. Rhyno and Ms. Forrest felt threatened by Mr. Grosse’s words and actions.  However, Mr. Rhyno’s response is notable.  He did not respond by locking the apartment door or take other steps to avoid any perceived threat, avoid any further confrontation or de-escalate.  He did not rush out of the apartment with Ms. Forrest.  
        Rather, Mr. Rhyno followed Mr. Grosse out of the apartment.  Security camera footage shows Mr. Rhyno looking around the 3rd floor hallway.  Perhaps more tellingly, without any additional information regarding Mr. Grosse’s intentions, the security camera footage clearly shows that Mr. Rhyno began walking around the hallway while holding a combat style knife in his right hand.  Mr. Rhyno did not know Mr. Grosse either had a weapon or was in the process of arming himself.
        In other words, absent any new information as to what Mr. Grosse was doing, Mr. Rhyno took hold of his own knife and left the apartment to meet a perceived threat. His actions were, in my view, more consistent with a person inclined towards reciprocal confrontation than a person attempting to extricate himself from a situation which he may not have caused but was quickly spinning out of control.
        Mr. Rhyno’s knife was designed with fitted handle which included a ring where the little finger is placed.  The knife’s blade was about 3’ long and curved inward, resembling a claw.  At one point, Mr. Rhyno looked up and stared directly into the security camera.  Immediately after that, he placed the knife back in his right coat pocket.  
        By 6:25:20 p.m., Mr. Grosse had entered Stevie Saulnier’s apartment and was now leaving.  He bounded back up the stairs from the 2nd floor towards the 3rd floor.  As Mr. Grosse jumped up the first few stairs, he flicked opened a switchblade held in his right hand.  Mr. Grosse was now armed.
        About 10 seconds later, at 6:25:30 p.m., Mr. Grosse arrived at the top of the stairwell leading to the third floor.  
        The fire door which separated the stairwell from the third floor hallway was closed.  Mr. Grosse transferred the switchblade from his right hand to his left so that he could push open the fire door. 
        On the other side of the fire door was Mr. Rhyno, standing directly in front of Mr. Grosse’s apartment. 
        Mr. Grosse’s switchblade was plainly visible when he opened the door.  However, again, by this time Mr. Rhyno held his own knife in his right hand pocket.  Mr. Grosse did not know that.
        When Mr. Grosse opened the fire door, Mr. Rhyno kept both hands in his coat pockets.  
        What happened next, happened in an instant but, again, it was all captured on video.  
        Mr. Grosse steps through the stairwell door and confronts Mr. Rhyno.  Again, Mr. Rhyno did not retreat.  He told Mr. Grosse to “Beat it” or “Move”.  
        At 6:25:32 p.m.[2], Mr. Grosse leans towards Mr. Rhyno and appears to be yelling something.  There is no audio in security video footage.  Mr. Rhyno testified that Mr. Grosse screamed “You’re fucking dead!”  By this point, Mr. Grosse had not yet transferred the knife from his left hand and back to his dominant right hand although the video shows he was preparing to do so.
        At that second, Mr. Rhyno suddenly pulled both hands out from his coat pocket, reached up toward Mr. Grosse’s neck and pushed him back.  As he did this, the knife in Mr. Rhyno’s right hand stabbed Mr. Grosse on the left side of his neck. 
        By this time, it bears noting that Mr. Grosse and Mr. Rhyno had known each other for less than a minute. 
        The attack occurred over a split second of time but, in that instant, Mr. Rhyno opened a wound to Mr. Grosse’s vertebral artery.  The vertebral artery is a massive blood vessel (3 – 4 cm) that runs along a bony canal in the upper neck.  Immediately after Mr. Rhyno stabbed Mr. Grosse, blood began to spurt from his neck and splatter all over the apartment door and floor.  At this point, and absent urgent medical treatment, Mr. Grosse was at risk of imminent death.
        Pausing here, it is important to confirm four things:
1.                 First, Mr. Rhyno struck first with the knife that he concealed in his pocket.  In addition, Mr. Grosse was taller.  When Mr. Rhyno suddenly pushed Mr. Grosse, he also moved his hands up towards Mr. Grosse’s neck;
2.                 Second, the knife continued after this first attack. But, again, the initial wound to the left side of Mr. Grosse’s neck proved fatal.  Nova Scotia’s Chief Medical Examiner, Dr. Matthew Bowes, testified that this initial stabbing cut to the left side of Mr. Grosse’s neck would have caused his death.  The other cuts suffered during the fight would have been peripheral, by comparison.  The effusion of blood gushing from Mr. Grosse’s neck following this cut supports this conclusion; and 
3.                 Third, I accept that Mr. Grosse was triggered into a volatile state of anger that was sufficiently intense as to motivate Mr. Grosse to leave apartment 12, arm himself with a knife, and then return to face Mr. Rhyno.  However, the evidence is also clear that Mr. Rhyno was not so agitated and upset.  Mr. Rhyno testified that he remained cool and in control throughout.  His demeanour in the security camera footage also bears this out.  I do not make the factual determination that Mr. Rhyno either lost his power of self-control or was provoked, as that term is understood at law; and
4.                 Fourth, while there may have been a defensive element Mr. Rhyno’s actions, they equally suggest an intention to inflict the first blow. Nevertheless and consistent with the jury’s verdict of manslaughter, he did not intend to kill Mr. Grosse or cause bodily harm that he knew was likely to cause death and was reckless whether death ensued.  In short, Mr. Rhyno did not form the requisite intent under section 229 of the Criminal Code to commit culpable homicide or murder.
        After stabbing Mr. Grosse, Mr. Rhyno immediately retreated back into apartment 12.  Mr. Grosse tried using his left arm and right leg to prevent Mr. Rhyno from shutting the door.  He was unsuccessful.  Mr. Rhyno shut and locked the door – a choice Mr. Rhyno unfortunately did not make earlier.
        Mr. Grosse neither sought nor received immediate medical treatment for his wounds.   Instead, he was furious and presumably unaware of his actual peril.  About 10 seconds after being stabbed, at 6:25:42 p.m., Ms. Ford opened the apartment door.  Despite massive amounts of blood gushing from his neck, Mr. Grosse rushed past Ms. Ford and re-engaged with Mr. Rhyno. 
        A chaotic knife fight ensued.  Between 6:25:42 p.m. – 6:25:53 p.m., Mr. Grosse and Mr. Rhyno grappled and struggled violently with one another in the living room of apartment 12 and then spilled out onto the apartment’s small, exterior balcony.  In the words of Ms. Ford, “two grown men were attacking the hell out of each other.”  
        Mr. Grosse suffered additional, lesser knife wounds – none as serious or lethal as the first cut which sliced through his vertebral artery. 
        At about 6:26:03 p.m., Mr. Rhyno pushed Mr. Grosse down on the balcony deck and ran.  He and Ms. Forrest fled the apartment, charged down the stairs and out of the building.  I do not find that this was the first opportunity they had to run.
        Mr. Grosse lifted himself from the balcony and chased Mr. Rhyno down the stairs, into the parking lot.  
        There was a brief stand-off between Mr. Rhyno and Mr. Grosse in the parking lot, but it did not involve additional physical violence.  
        By 6:26:31 p.m., about 15 second after reaching the parking lot, Mr. Grosse began to appear unsteady.  He staggered back.  Mr.  Rhyno and Ms. Forrest (who was on the passenger side of the car) jumped in the car.
        At about the same time, Michael Saulnier rushed forward and discharged the contents of a fire extinguisher in the open car door.  Michael Saulnier did not live in the apartment building, but his mother did.  In addition, Michael Saulnier was Stevie Saulnier’s brother who lived on the 2nd floor. 
        The contents of the fire extinguisher enveloped Mr. Rhyno’s car like a cloud of white smoke.
        Within 10 seconds of that, Mr. Grosse was visibly struggling and in grave danger.  He bent slightly and placed his hand against his cut neck.  He stumbled towards another friend, Amanda Saulnier, who was now in the parking lot.  Amanda Saulnier is another sibling of Stevie Saulnier (his sister) and another member of the Saulnier family living in a separate apartment at 24 Primrose Street.  Amanda Saulnier was also the building superintendent.  
        Mr. Grosse then collapsed in front of Amanda Saulnier, about 20 feet or so from Mr. Rhyno’s car. 
        At 6:26:47, Mr. Rhyno put his car in reverse.  The car was still filled with white discharge from the fire extinguisher.  Mr. Rhyno momentarily stopped to open the driver’s side door and exhaust some more white smoke (the discharge from the fire extinguisher).  He and Ms. Forrest then sped out of the parking lot. 
        Pausing here, I agree that Mr. Rhyno should not be faulted at this point for failing to stop and assist Mr. Grosse.   After being stabbed by Mr. Rhyno, Mr. Grosse was seriously injured but he was also inflamed.   He hurtling himself back into a knife fight with Mr. Rhyno as soon as the apartment door was unlocked.  He chased Mr. Rhyno out of the building, still holding his switchblade. Unlike many cases where the victim became incapacitated while the offender was still present, Mr. Rhyno and Ms. Forrest only tore out of the parking lot at around the same time  Mr. Grosse was just collapsing – and following a period of chaotic violence and confusion when Mr. Grosse was still armed and in pursuit.
        Police and paramedics were quick to arrive on scene.  They found Mr. Grosse lying on the parking lot, having lost massive amounts of blood.  Mr. Grosse’s heart stopped but the paramedics managed to restore a weak pulse.  They quickly transferred Mr. Grosse to the emergency room for urgent medical care.  Despite heroic measures to save his life, Mr. Grosse never regained consciousness.  Mr. Grosse died in the early hours of October 23, 2020.
STATUTORY PROVISIONS REGARDING SENTENCE FOR MANSLAUGHTER
        The offence of Manslaughter carries a maximum punishment of life imprisonment. There is no mandatory minimum sentence.  (section 236(b) of the Criminal Code)
        Absolute and conditional discharges are not available for the crime of manslaughter (Section 730(1) of the Criminal Code).  Conditional sentences are also not available (s. 742.1(c) of the Criminal Code)
         In addition, because manslaughter is a primary designated offence, the following ancillary orders are mandatory:
1.                  A DNA order is mandatory upon conviction (s. 487.051(1) of the Criminal Code; and
2.                 A mandatory firearms prohibition order pursuant to s. 109(1)(a) of the Criminal Code. The duration of such an order is governed by s. 109(2) of the Criminal Code.
CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE OFFENDER
        The parties filed a pre-sentence report prepared by Jennifer Keeler and dated November 16, 2022.  I glean the following information from that report:
1.                 Mr. Rhyno was born on March 31, 1987.  He will be 36 years old in less than 3 months time;
2.                 Mr. Rhyno is the eldest of four brothers and he describes his childhood as a happy one.  There is no evidence that, during his youth, Mr. Rhyno suffered family dysfunction or other trauma that might have somehow twisted his behaviours or beliefs as an adult;
3.                 Mr. Rhyno left home when he was about 18 years old and quickly fell into a mess of trouble.  By the age of 19, Mr. Rhyno was serving his first jail sentence.  He has been in and out of jail ever since.  I return to Mr. Rhyno’s prior criminal record below.  It is extensive.  Nevertheless, Mr.  Rhyno maintains strong ties of affection with family members, some of whom consistently supported him throughout this trial.  That said, Mr. Rhyno has no significant personal connections beyond immediately family;
4.                 In terms of education, Mr. Rhyno was just 2 courses away from high school graduation when he was expelled.  However, Mr. Rhyno returned to school while incarcerated and completed his Grade 12 General Equivalency Diplomacy;
5.                 As to work experience, Mr. Rhyno advises that he is considered a Journeyman Iron Worker and was working his way towards a Red Seal as an Iron Worker at the time of Mr. Grosse’s death.  Periods of incarceration for criminal offences consistently delayed and disrupted his work in this trade. During the sentencing hearing, Mr. Rhyno filed a letter from a “Placing Manager” at Harris Rebar: Blaine Singer.  Mr. Singer confirmed that Mr. Rhyno worked full time with Harris Rebar.  He described Mr. Rhyno as a “dependable worker that was always on time and never missed any shifts.”  He concluded that he would consider rehiring Mr. Rhyno if there were any openings in the future. 
6.                 As to health, Mr. Rhyno reports suffering from anxiety and depression.  His mother, Kimberley Guy, confirms the diagnosis of anxiety and adds Post Traumatic Stress Disorder.  Mr. Rhyno is currently taking medication for sleep and anxiety.
7.                 Finally, in this report, Mr. Rhyno confessed to historic issues with drug abuse, notably opiates, but says that he is now drug-free.  He also admitted having a “bit of a temper”.  
VICTIM IMPACT STATEMENTS
        Zachery Grosse’s father (Charles Grosse) and mother (Roxanne Bowden-Grosse) both read their victim impact statements into Court.  It was difficult to watch their searing grief while recounting the immeasurable damage done to themselves and their family when their son died so suddenly and violently on October 23, 2020.  That family includes Zachery’s very young daughter, Missy, his younger brother, and numerous members of the extended family who still struggle to understand his death.  
        Mr. Grosse and Ms. Grosse are to be thanked and commended for the strength and courage needed to speak publicly of their loss and suffering.  It is a torment which continues to this day and will haunt them and their family.
        Mr. Grosse and Ms. Grosse both commented that it is difficult to find justice in these tragic circumstances.  They are right.  Sometimes those who are lost cannot be found in this life, except in memory.  We cannot always collect the pieces of a life shattered by the death of a loved one.
        Ms. Grosse is also right when she says that our system of justice is imperfect.  There is a philosophical view that says justice means ensuring people receive what they deserve.  This hearing seeks to achieve a measure of that justice by fashioning a deserving sentence for Mr. Rhyno based on the purposes and principles established under our law.  For that reason, it is necessarily focussed on the offender.  
        In a more profound sense, however, the Courts cannot provide the same justice to the victims (including Zachery and his family) because Zachery did not receive what he deserved.  He did not deserve to die.  And this Court cannot restore to Zachery or his family the life that was taken.  
        Courts inhabit a place where ideals around justice mingle with the painful and often incomprehensible tragedies that surround the human condition – like Zachery’s death.   Inspired by ideals around justice, Courts appeal to our better nature.  And Courts might moderate the injuries caused by our baser instincts.  But Courts cannot prevent or fully heal the harsh realities of life. 
        I conclude by commenting briefly on Ms. Grosse’s final words, quoting from the Bible.  She said “Do not repay evil for evil.  Do what is right.  Live in peace.”  I was taken by her words.  They were remarkably gracious and offer a flicker of light in a dark time for the Grosse family.  I realize that Zachery’s family remain in mourning but these words demonstrate an abiding faith, an understanding that retributive vengeance is not the answer, and a hope that Zachery and his family will find their peace.
MR. RHYNO’S CRIMINAL RECORD
        Mr. Rhyno has a troubling criminal record punctuated with crimes of violence and, as well, weapons offences.
        Mr. Rhyno accepts the following brief summary of Mr. Rhyno’s criminal record, taken from the Crown’s written submissions on sentencing at paragraph 9:
Mr. Rhyno has 22 prior convictions, grouped as follows: 
Offences of Violence: 
Assault Causing Bodily Harm 
2 x Assault with a Weapon 
Assault 
 
Weapons Offences: 
Use of a Firearm during the Commission of an Offence 
2 x Possession of a Firearm While Prohibited 
Possession of a Firearm Knowing its Possession is Unauthorized 
Possession of a Prohibited or Restricted Weapon 
Conspiracy to Commit an Offence 
Careless Use of a Firearm 
 
Offences Against the Administration of Justice: 
5 x Breach of Bail Orders 
Unlawfully at Large 
 
Property Offences: 
Theft Over 
Possession of Stolen Property 
 
Drug and Alcohol Offences 
Trafficking in a Controlled Substance 
Possession for the Purpose of Trafficking 
Driving While Over 80”
        Attached as Appendix “A” to these reasons is a summary of facts which underpin certain of these convictions.  All parties consented to the wording of these underlying facts.
        During oral submissions, the Crown reviewed Mr. Rhyno’s record over the past 16 years, pointing out that Mr. Rhyno would only be briefly out of prison before re-offending and re-committed.  The Crown suggests that Mr. Rhyno’s adult life reveals a consistent pattern of crime interspersed not so much by peaceful, lawful behaviour but, rather, inactivity associated with incarceration.  The Crown further argues that Mr. Rhyno’s actions are consistently and predictably punctuated by bursts of violence and poor, impulsive decisions often involving criminality.  The Crown concludes that to date, and notwithstanding significant time in prison, Mr. Rhyno’s capacity for violence as a means to achieve his ends has neither dampened nor diminished.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF SENTENCING
        A fit and proper sentence is necessarily contextualized and individualized.  Among other things, each offence involves a unique accused and unique surrounding circumstances.
        The analysis is informed by section 718 of the Criminal Code which confirms that the fundamental purpose of sentencing is to contribute to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing “just sanctions”.  
        Section 718 further confirms that this purpose is achieved by imposing a “just sanction” that has one or more of the following objectives:
1.                 Denunciation (section 718(a));
2.                 Deterrence (section 718(b));
3.                 Separating offenders from society (section 718(c));
4.                 Rehabilitation (section 718(d));
5.                 Reparations to the victim or community (section 718(e)); and
6.                 Promoting accountability and the need to accept responsibility for harms done to victims and society (section 718(f)).
        Section 718.1 and 781. 2 provides principles which the Court must apply or consider to ensure the fundamental purpose and related objectives of sentencing are realized.  In particular:
1.                 Section 718.1 codifies the principle of proportionality or, more specifically, that: “[a] sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender”;
2.                 Section 718.2 lists the following additional principles that must be applied to reach a just sentence.  For the purposes of this hearing, the following particular provisions are germane:
a.                        Section 718.2(a): Aggravating or mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or the offender (section 718.2(a))[3];
b.                        Section 718.2(b) of the Code speaks to parity and the notion that “a sentence should be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences committed in similar circumstances.” The principle of parity differs from that of proportionality, mentioned above.  Proportionality demands that a just sentence reflect the unique, particular circumstances of the offender and the offence.  By contrast, a sentencing regime that is just and fair strives for parity so that similar sentences are imposed in similar situations.  To achieve parity, the Court looks beyond the single case before it and searches for appropriate comparisons in the jurisprudence.  In doing so, the Court not only achieves parity but invokes the collective wisdom of other judges facing similar issues.  These two principles (proportionality and parity) do not work at cross-purposes.  On the contrary, they work in tandem towards a just and proportionate sentence.  Thus, in R v Friesen, 2020 SCC 9, the Supreme Court of Canada wrote: “Parity is an expression of proportionality.  A consistent application of proportionality will lead to parity. Conversely, an approach that assigns the same sentence to unlike cases can achieve neither parity nor proportionality” (at paragraph 32).
CSC RECORDS AND NATIONAL PAROLE BOARD DECISION
        An issue arose regarding certain evidence relied upon by the Crown in sentencing.  In particular, the Crown tenders and relies upon:
1.                 Criminal Profile Report, dated March 29, 2016; 
2.                 An Assessment for Decision on Statutory Release, dated February 5, 2019; and 
3.                 A Parole Board of Canada Decision on Statutory Release, dated April 3, 2019. 
(collectively, “Mr. Rhyno’s Incarceration Records”)
        I previously decided that these documents were admissible but subject to weight.  It is necessary to comment further on this issue.
        The Crown relies upon passages in Mr. Rhyno’s Incarceration Records to demonstrate behaviours which are impulsive and often violent.  These documents also offer negative opinions regarding Mr. Rhyno’s lack of remorse, lack of progress towards a more peaceful lifestyle, aggression and the risks he poses to others.  The Crown takes the position that this evidence does not constitute an “aggravating factor” in sentencing per se but goes to “character” or “context” relevant to the sentencing objectives of general and specific deterrence and, as well, the issue of Mr. Rhyno’s rehabilitative prospects.    
        The defence contends that the Crown’s use of this information is disingenuous and disguises the true import of this evidence: aggravating factors intended to be the determinative factor pushing Mr. Rhyno’s sentence well beyond the normal range for manslaughter.  Moreover, the defence points to cases which support the basic, uncontroversial proposition that an offender cannot be given a harsher sentences for various offences that have never been proven.
        Generally speaking, “aggravating factors” are “those that push the appropriate sentence towards the higher end of the range. Mitigating factors are those that push the appropriate sentence towards the lower end of the range” (R v Henry, 2011 ONCJ 501 at paragraph 36).
        “Aggravating factors” which, by themselves, can prompt  a more severe or harsh penalty must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt (R v Ferguson, 2008 SCC 6 (CanLII), 1 SCR 96 (“Ferguson”) at paragraph 18).  
        Most “aggravating factors” referenced in sentencing decisions involve the specific facts and circumstances related to the particular offence in question.  For example, the use of a knife or a firearm while committing manslaughter or the extent to which the offender instigated violence are frequently described as “aggravating factors”.  Because the offender has just been convicted, these facts will, by definition, have been proven beyond a reasonable doubt.  And these types of factors may compel a harsher sentence.
        Obviously, when sentencing an offender, there are other facts which the Court may rely upon beyond the specific facts of the offence.  For example, the Court is typically provided with a pre-sentence report which summarizes the offender’s prior criminal record and also discusses such things as the  offender’s upbringing, family ties, social connections, health, education and work experience.  This type of evidence is relevant to the broader sentencing objectives enumerated in section 718 and including, for example, the need for deterrence and the offender’s rehabilitative prospects.  Unlike “aggravating factors”, this type of evidence must only be proven on a balance of probabilities (Ferguson at paragraph 18).  The underlying rationale is, among other things, that the rigorous evidentiary standards that apply at trial must be relaxed at sentencing  so that a sentencing judge might more easily access “the fullest possible information concerning the background of the accused if he is to fit the sentence to the offender rather than to the crime” (R v Gardiner,  1982 CanLII 30 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 368 at paragraph 109).
        That said, the analysis which bears upon this additional evidence (i.e. evidence regarding facts not specifically connected to the offence itself) becomes more nuanced and complicated when dealing with an offender’s prior criminal record. There are at least two concerns:
1.                 The offender has already served the sentences imposed in connection with prior offences.  He cannot be punished twice past for the same criminal behaviours;
2.                 Evidence regarding a prior criminal record can become unduly prejudicial.  Thus, while this sort of evidence might have an “aggravating” impact on sentencing (i.e. result in a harsher penalty), the Courts must take care to ensure that this evidence is not afforded so much weight that it results in a disproportionately harsh sentence   (R v Mauger, 2018 NSCA 41 (“Mauger”) at paragraph 68).
        In my view, the following principles apply:
1.                 Evidence around a prior criminal record is clearly admissible.  “A prior record can speak to the need for greater emphasis on specific deterrence or diminish the importance of rehabilitation…”  (Mauger at paragraph 65). 
2.                 “A criminal record that is not dated and reveals a pattern of conduct for similar offences may well result in a stiffer sentence and is "aggravating" because it can impact the court's analysis of the purpose and principles of sentence to arrive at a fit sentence” (Mauger at paragraph 67);
3.                 However, a prior criminal record “on its own, it is not an aggravating factor leading to a sentence that is untethered to the purposes and principles of sentence” (Mauger at paragraph 64).  A prior criminal record must not be given such weight such that it alone becomes the sole aggravating factor driving a harsher penalty disproportionate to the crime for which the offender is being sentenced. (Mauger at paragraph 65, quoting from the Supreme Court of Canada decision in R v. Angelillo, 2006 SCC 55 at paragraph 24)
        As indicated, these principles inform the Court’s sentencing approach to an offender’s prior criminal record.  But what of other evidence that suggests misconduct that approaches criminal conduct but for which there is no conviction?  More specifically in this case, what of Mr. Rhyno’s Incarceration Records which indicate very problematic behaviours and attitudes? What weight should be afforded this evidence?
        Neither party provided caselaw dealing specifically with the use of institutional disciplinary records or Parole Board decisions. There is caselaw which touches upon these issues but it is sparse.  For example:
1.                 In R v Strickland, 2012 BCCA 276, the appellant alleged that the sentencing judge had made an unsupported finding that the appellant did not accept the harmful nature of his drug-dealing activity and used it as an aggravating factor. On a review of the record, the British Columbia Court of Appeal rejected this argument on the basis that the trial judge might have used “more nuanced” language but, nevertheless, this evidence went to the objective of specific deterrence (at paragraph 18);
2.                 In R v Clarke-McNeil, 2022 NSSC 63, Campbell, J. confirmed the offender’s prior criminal record and his prison discipline record (see paragraph 25) and he commented:
Again though, it is hard to square this record of behaviour with the person described by his sisters, his fiancé and his friend. That is not to say that their impressions are wrong. It does illustrate that people are too complex to be characterized as good or bad, kind-hearted or cruel, violent or peaceful. Kevin Clarke-McNeil's character is made up of the sum of everything he has ever done, for better or for worse. Neither the post offence convictions nor the institutional disciplinary record are aggravating factors in his sentencing. Both provide some context with which to consider Mr. Clarke-McNeil's assertions about his generally congenial disposition. 
[at paragraph 27, emphasis added.]
        With respect to Parole Board decisions in particular, I note the recent decision of R v Watts, 2022 NBCA 34 (“Watts”).  In that case, the appellant had been convicted of breach of a long-term supervision order or “LTSO”. In his sentence appeal, he challenged the use which the trial judge made of parole board decisions highlighting a string of suspensions of prior LTSOs. The New Brunswick Court of Appeal recognized the “readily apparent” relevance of the Parole Board decision in question because the content of the Parole Board decisions related to the same offence (breach of an LTSO) and clearly overlapped the matter before the sentencing judge.  Therefore, the Court of Appeal concluded, the nature of this evidence “dovetails with the necessity of having a broad range of information about an offender on sentencing” (at paragraph 60).
        The New Brunswick Court of Appeal also repeated the generally accepted proposition discussed above; namely, that a sentencing judge “must have as much information as possible about [the offender]” (at paragraph 60). The Court further states that this additional evidence could come in the form of an expert opinion regarding such things as rehabilitative prospects and risks of re-offending.  However, the Court continued by offering the following, important caveat: “the probative value to be assigned to an expert opinion is directly related to the amount and quality of admissible evidence on which it relies…” (at paragraph 61, quoting from R v Lévesque, 2000 SCC 47 (“Lévesque”).  
        Finally, the New Brunswick Court of Appeal referred to sections 723 - 724 of the Criminal Code codifying how parties may make submissions regarding relevant facts on sentencing and, as well, how factual disputes are to be resolved (section 724(2)).  On this issue, the New Brunswick Court of Appeal ultimately determined that:
There was no clarity as to whether Mr. Watts intended at the sentencing hearing to dispute parts of the decisions, let alone which facts, if any, that he disputed. Against this background it is not surprising Mr. Watts did not appeal the judge's decision to admit the Board's decisions, albeit subject to the ability to dispute facts. Further, in light of the fact he did not identify any disputed facts, it now appears his initial objection to the decisions, which was advanced as part of his position that the judge should sentence him without any facts or evidence of his LTSO or his history since his release, was tactical. To now assert that it was an error for the judge to consider such evidence is, at best, unsustainable on appeal.
[at paragraph 83]
        I have considered the information identified by the Crown in Mr. Rhyno’s Incarceration Records.  In my view, this information should be approached with caution and afforded limited weight.  My reasons include:
1.                 As confirmed by the jurisprudence, a degree of latitude is afforded the evidence presented on sentencing to better ensure a fit and just result.  As indicated, for example, much of the information contained in a pre-sentence report contains hearsay evidence.  With respect to facts surrounding a person’s behaviours while incarcerated, for example, there are understandable differences between a person on remand who has an exemplary record and a person whose disciplinary record may be riddled with facts which demonstrate problematic behaviours.  These issues may bear upon sentencing;  
2.                 The facts which have been proven for the purpose of sentencing incorporate Mr. Rhyno’s prior convictions, and include him being unlawfully at large which, in turn, led to the Parole Board’s decision to revoke his statutory release.  However, there is a difference between prior convictions and the Parole Board Decision.  Evidence around prior convictions is a normal part of any sentencing hearing and it may have an “aggravating impact”.  I have given these facts due weight.  However, again, this type of evidence is somewhat different from true “aggravating factors” which are related to the offence itself and, based on the conviction, have been proven beyond a reasonable doubt.  By contrast, prior convictions going to such issues as deterrence or rehabilitation need only be proven on the balance of probabilities.  Nevertheless, it is helpful to reiterate that the essential elements of prior crime were originally and, by definition, proven beyond a reasonable doubt.  By contrast, the content of Mr. Rhyno’s Incarceration Records were not subject to the same evidentiary rigours as a criminal trial.  I mention this only to confirm that the origins, purpose, nature and quality of the information contained in “context” or character” evidence must be taken into account.  I return to this issue. 
3.                 Turning to the specific information contained in Mr. Rhyno’s Incarceration Records, it is tendered primarily for the opinions they contain regarding Mr. Rhyno’s lack of progress towards rehabilitation and the need for specific deterrence.   The Crown focusses on these specific issues (specific deterrence and poor rehabilitative prospects) in support of a sentence that goes beyond the normal range in Nova Scotia of 4-10 years imprisonment for manslaughter in Nova Scotia (see R v Isadore, 2022 NSSC 209 (“Isadore”) at paragraph 57 and R v Lawrence, [1999] N.S.J. No. 25 (N.S.C.A.) at paragraph 14).  In my view, where sentencing evidence is relied upon primarily for its “aggravating” impact (i.e. resulting in a harsher sentence), the factors which go to weight include:
a.                        The nature of the evidence in question and the extent to while it clearly overlaps in the nature of the crime for which the offender is being sentenced;   
b.                       The quality of the underlying evidence, bearing in mind the circumstances and purposes in which the evidence arose; and
c.                        The extent to which it is being relied upon for its “aggravating” impact – including the corresponding risk of imposing a disproportionate sentence.
        As to the nature of the evidence in question, as indicated, it is primarily in the form of opinions regarding Mr. Rhyno’s impulsive decisions often involving non-compliant, illegal and sometimes violent misbehaviour, and his lack of demonstrable progress towards rehabilitation.  These opinions are connected to the purposes and principles of sentencing, but only because they offer broad pronouncements on issues that are ultimately for the sentencing judge to assess.  By contrast, I note that in Watts, the nature of the evidence (prior Parole Board decisions regarding the breach of an LTSO) specifically and clearly overlapped the particular issue before the sentencing judge.
        As to the quality of the opinion evidence contained in Mr. Rhyno’s Incarceration Records, many of these opinions are derived from information contained in other file materials that were not produced.  Examples include:
1.                 “This writer reviewed the Preventative Security file on 2016-03-29.  According to the file, OMS and RADAR the offender [i.e. Mr. Rhyno] has a significant volume of negative institutional behaviour on prior federal terms.  He has also been historically problematic while housed in the provincial system.” (Criminal Profile Report at page 5);
2.                 “It is reported that Mr. Rhyno takes inappropriate risks and does not always consider the consequences of his actions.” (Criminal Profile Report, page 6);
3.                 “File information indicates that the subject [Mr. Rhyno] has criminal ingrained values and beliefs, negative associates, poor problem solving skills, emotional aggression, and has a tendency to use intimidation, threats and violence to solve problems, all of which has contributed to his offence cycle.” (Assessment for Decision, page 3);
4.                 In the Parole Board Decision revoking Mr. Rhyno’s statutory release, the Board summarizes significant amounts of “file information” in support of such conclusions as:
a.                        “The Board believes [Mr. Rhyno’s] inability to follow the rules and terms of [his] release is consistent with [his] past criminal behaviour and that [his] inability to control [his] impulsive behaviour and remain substance free speak to the prevalent risk factors at play….” (at page 5); and
b.                       “The Board is satisfied that [Mr. Rhyno] will, by reoffending before the expiration of [his] sentence according to law, present an undue risk to society.  Also, [his] undue risk is due to circumstances well within [his control].”
        The difficulty with these opinions is that the expertise of the person who formed these opinions is unclear because it is embedded in Mr. Rhyno’s undisclosed file information.  Certain specific facts relied upon in support of these statements is similarly unclear.  With respect to the Criminal Profile Report and the Assessment for Decision Report, it is similarly unclear the extent to which the underlying facts led to actual consequences (e.g. disciplinary levels) and also whether the offender was given the opportunity to challenge these opinions is also not always clear.  To state the obvious: the purpose for which Mr. Rhyno’s Incarceration Records were created are different from the purpose for which they are being used in this sentencing hearing.  Those difference must be recognized.
        None of these concerns may affect or even be relevant to the purpose for which Mr. Rhyno’s Incarceration Records were actually, originally created.  These are not necessarily issues which, for example, concern a corrections officer recording observations regarding Mr. Rhyno.  There are almost certainly other operational issues which predominate and supersede the particular concerns which arise at this sentencing hearing. I do not doubt  or call into question the expertise and professionalism of the persons who authored Mr. Rhyno’s Incarceration Records.  And I do not suggest that Mr. Rhyno’s Incarceration Records were somehow deficient having regard to the purposes for which they were created.  On this point, the Crown emphasizes (and I recognize) that prison officials are under a statutory obligation to ensure their records are fair and accurate.  I certainly do not question the National Parole Board’s Decision.
        However, in the circumstances of this case, when the information in question is being removed from its original setting and imported into a sentencing hearing as an “aggravating” factor, a statutory obligation to be fair and accurate does not sweep away the concerns that arise around opinion evidence and the accuracy, reliability or weight of facts underlying such opinions.  I repeat the Supreme Court of Canada’s caution in Lévesque referenced above: the probative value of opinion evidence is directly related to the quality of admissible evidence upon which it is based.  To that, I note that Supreme Court in Lévesque added that “before admitting new opinion evidence on appeal, it may be necessary to determine the basis of that opinion (for example, the version of events relied on by the expert, the documents he or she consulted, and so forth) and to establish whether the facts on which the opinion is based have been proven and are credible” (at paragraph 31 of Lévesque and quoted with approval at paragraph 61 of Watts).
   This leads to the remaining factor and the extent to which the evidence in question is being relied upon for its “aggravating” impact.  In my view, again, the concerns identified above are heightened in the particular circumstances of this case because the Crown relies upon this evidence for a very significant “aggravating” impact which would see Mr. Rhyno imprisoned for a term longer than the normal range in Nova Scotia.
   Overall, I have carefully reviewed Mr. Rhyno’s extensive criminal record.  It is clearly admissible.  It is problematic and I am troubled by it.  I have given this evidence due weight in sentencing. 
   I have also reviewed the passages of documents relied upon by the Crown in Mr. Rhyno’s Incarceration Records.  There may be other sentencing hearings where this type of information attracts greater weight.  However, in the circumstances of this case and for the reasons given above, I give very limited weight to this evidence on the issue of deterrence and rehabilitative prospects.  For clarity, I have not given them such weight as to push Mr. Rhyno into an entirely different range of sentencing outcomes such that this evidence becomes, in and of itself, the basis for a much longer term of imprisonment. In my view, the evidence relied upon in Mr. Rhyno’s Incarceration Records raises a very serious risk of a disproportionate sentence if given too much weight. 
RANGE OF SENTENCE
   There is no minimum sentence for manslaughter and the maximum penalty is lifetime.  In other words, the range of possible sentences for manslaughter is wide.  The reason for this huge scope is due to that where the ultimate outcome is a person’s death, the acts, circumstances and intentions leading up to that outcomes are so varied.  They range from truly unintentional harm to violence which approaches (but does not constitute) culpable homicide or “near murder”.  In R v Henry, 2002 NSCA 33, Roscoe, J.A. confirmed that the spectrum of sentencing decisions in cases involving manslaughter are so varied because “the offence covers such an extensive array of methods of commission” (at paragraph 16).  As such, each sentence is determined on a case by case basis, having regard to the particular facts.  
   Similarly, in R v Creighton (1993), 1993 CanLII 61 (SCC), 83 C.C.C. (3d) 346 (S.C.C.), the Supreme Court of Canada similarly noted that “the sentence can be and is tailored to suit the degree of moral fault of the offender” (at page 375)  .
   In R v Isadore, 2022 NSSC 209 (“Isadore”), Duncan, ACJ equally observed that where there is a higher degree of moral blameworthiness, longer sentences have been imposed  (at paragraph 57).  
   The fact that sentences are determined on a case by case basis does not mean that the underlying reasoning is arbitrary or unprincipled.  On the contrary, the jurisprudence reveals distinct principles which govern where a particular crime might fall within an otherwise wide spectrum of potential sentences.  A key driving factor which determines where a particular incidence of manslaughter falls along the continuum of sentences is the “moral culpability or blameworthiness” of the offender having regard to the specific facts.  In my view, that is a fact-driven inquiry.  The factors include:
1.                 The nature and gravity of the act and the associated risk of harm to the victim.  This would included an assessment as to whether the victim was armed;
2.                 Whether a weapon was used in committing the offence and, if so, the nature of the weapon; how the weapon was acquired; and whether it was used repeatedly (e.g. multiple stabbings as opposed to a single cut); and
3.                 The extent to  which the offender was aware of and instigated violence.  While a conviction for manslaughter necessarily precludes, by definition, an acquittal based on self-defence, the offender may not have instigated the violence and their actions may involve defensive responses to violence.
   I emphasize that this is not an exhaustive list of all relevant factors.
   As indicated above, in Isadore, Duncan, ACJ noted that the “general view that the range of sentencing in Nova Scotia is  4 – 10 years.” (at paragraph 57.  See also R v Lawrence, N.S.J. No. 25 (N.S.C.A.) (“Lawrence”) at paragraph 14).
   The Court has also imposed longer sentences.  See Lawrence at paragraph 14.  Also, at paragraph 61 of Isadore, Duncan, ACJ listed a number of serious cases where the sentence for manslaughter ranged from 12 years to life imprisonment.  I note that all of those cases listed by Duncan, ACJ involving sentences of more than 12 years are distinguishable from the facts before me in that they involve intimate relationships debased by brutality and ending with extreme violence causing death.
    I am attaching to this decision as Appendix “B” my review of the numerous cases reviewed in respect of sentencing ranges, including all of the cases relied upon by the Crown and the Defendant.  I have taken all of these cases into account when reaching my decision on sentence.
Analysis
   The Crown proposes a sentence on the higher end of the scale  10 – 12 years which is beyond the general range for manslaughter.
   The Defence proposes a sentence on the lower end:  5 years.
   In my view, the range of possible sentences for this type of offence in the circumstances of this case is 6  – 10 years.  The question becomes where Mr. Rhyno falls within this range.
   I do not find that this is a case of “near murder”.  Nor do the facts suggest the sort of prolonged brutality with multiple stab wounds that are evidence in the cases relied upon by the Crown.  Moreover, a key distinguishing factor is that Mr. Grosse left apartment 12 after only speaking with Mr. Rhyno for less than a minute.  Mr. Grosse then decided to arm himself with a switchblade and return to confront Mr. Rhyno.
   In terms of other mitigating factors, the violence in this case was spontaneous and flared suddenly.  There was no planning or premeditation.  Mr. Rhyno did not arrive at 24 Primrose Street looking for trouble or with a view to inflicting harm.  The lead-up to the lethal exchange was neither complex nor prolonged.
   As indicated, Mr. Grosse was also armed.  To that extent, there was an element of defensiveness to Mr. Rhyno’s actions.  However, again and for emphasis, I find that Mr. Rhyno inclined towards confrontation and only retreated to apartment 12 after inflicting a knife wound to Mr. Grosse’s neck with the knife Mr. Rhyno had concealed in his coat pocket.
   The confrontation did not involve the sort of multiple, frenzied or aggressive cuts that were on display in other cases involving greater cruelty or brutality.
   Mr. Rhyno did turn himself into the police.  I recognize that Mr. Rhyno was already captured on security cameras and so his involvement would have been known.  Nevertheless, he did not attempt to escape and his efforts avoided a search.
   Mr. Rhyno is still relatively young.  He continues to enjoy family support that has remained dedicated despite Mr. Rhyno’s past criminality.  Mr. Rhyno has also begun to demonstrate his ability to integrate into the work force as evidenced by the supportive letter received from his employer’s Placing Manager, Blaine Singer.
   There were, of course, aggravating factors as well.
   Mr. Rhyno used a combat style knife to cut Mr. Grosse.  It is an inherently dangerous weapon.
   Mr. Rhyno held the knife in his coat pocket before lunging at Mr. Grosse.  Mr. Grosse would not have known Mr. Rhyno was armed and would not have expected a sudden, ultimately lethal, cut to his neck.
   Mr. Rhyno was the first to strike and his stabbing motion moved upwards towards Mr. Grosse’s upper body and neck.  Prior to inflicting this cut, I do not find that Mr. Rhyno availed himself of available opportunities to extricate himself or avoid confrontation.  On the contrary, my view is that Mr. Rhyno was not prepared to back down.
   An important “aggravating” issue in this case is the circumstances of the offender and what his criminal record says about the need to emphasize specific deterrence, that is, the imposition of a sentence that seeks to deter him from engaging in further conduct that causes harm to other people. There is also a real chance in my mind that without that rehabilitation, and without his own personal commitment to it, he will continue to be a risk to his own safety and to those around him. The penalty to be imposed today must recognize the need therefore to protect society both through such rehabilitative programming and, in the interim, separating him from the community where he represents a danger.  
CONCLUSION
   In all the circumstances, I sentence Mr. Rhyno to 8 years in prison.  The credit for pre-sentence custody is 40 months, on agreement by all parties and representing 799 real days with credit of 1.5 = 1,199 days = 40 months, rounded up.
   The sentence of 8 years will be reduced by 40 months (rounded up), representing credit for pre-trial time in custody.
   There are to be Ancillary Orders which I understand the Defence does not challenge.  These Ancillary Orders:
1.                 First, as manslaughter is a primary designated offence, you are required to comply with a DNA order pursuant to s. 487.051(1) of the Criminal Code and, specifically, to supply a sample of your DNA suitable for forensic analysis; and
2.                 Second, you shall be subject to a mandatory weapons Prohibition Order under s. 109(1)(a) of the Criminal Code.  The duration of this prohibition shall be for life and shall include all firearms, cross bows, ammunition, explosive substances and other restricted devices.  Similarly and pursuant to section 291, you must forfeit any weapons and ammunition as described in the order
   Finally, the Crown confirmed that pursuant to section 737(2.1) of the Criminal Code, the Victim Surcharge is waived. Mr. Rhyno had little or no meaningful employment or income prior to his incarceration and will not be in a position for several years to even attempt to pay the surcharge. I am satisfied therefore that your circumstances fall within the provisions described in ss. 737 (2.1), (2.2), and (2.3) which are the provisions that permit the waiver of the Victim Surcharge.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ns/sc/2023nssc28.html
            During the course of his arrest for multiple sexual assault and assault charges, RCMP officers seized Jakob Fardy’s Apple iPhone.  An ITO was subsequently prepared and a search warrant was issued for certain contents of Mr. Fardy’s smartphone.  The Crown wants to rely on various items of electronic evidence retrieved from Mr. Fardy’s phone by police.  
            At the commencement of trial, Mr. Brown, who represents Mr. Fardy, advised the court that he was challenging the constitutionality of the search on the basis that on its face the ITO did not set out reasonable grounds; the manner of the search went beyond what the search warrant authorized; the police scoured and/or “rummaged around” in Mr. Fardy’s phone unconstitutionally; and the police failed to keep detailed notes of their search of the phone.  As a result, he says that Mr. Fardy’s s. 8 Charter rights were violated, and any evidence seized from his phone should be excluded under s. 24(2) of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. The parties have asked for a decision on the s. 8 issue prior to making submissions regarding s. 24(2). 
Facts
The ITO
            The Information to Obtain was sworn on September 16, 2020. It was drafted by Constable Christopher Robert Marshall who stated that he had been a member of the RCMP since July 2011, and that as of September 16, 2020, he had been involved in a variety of criminal investigations and had drafted no less than 95 ITOs.   
            The items the affiant sought to search and seize are detailed at the outset of the ITO:
Data located a cellular device including:
 
•         Messages (SMS, MMS, etc.)
•         Call logs
•         Social Media Application Messages (Facebook, Instagram, etc.)
•         Pictures
•         Videos
•         Emails
            I have reviewed and considered the entire ITO. Very generally, it includes a review of the charges facing Mr. Fardy, which involve allegations of assault and sexual assault respecting multiple complainants over the span of approximately four years.  As of the writing of the ITO, the police had identified five complainants and had interviewed over 40 people. They had more people to interview, and had arrested and charged Mr. Fardy on July 30, 2020.  The relevant passages of the ITO include the following: 
5.         …Mr. Fardy is an adult, of similar age to the victims and was either acquaintances of or dating the victims at the time of the assaults and sexual assaults…
 
…
 
GROUNDS FOR RELIEF
8. On July 15th, 2020, five (5) young women attended the New Minas RCMP Detachment to speak to police about having all been sexually assaulted by one male, Mr. Jakob Fardy. Statements were obtained from four of the young women and one woman was referred to the Kentville Police Services, as the sexual assault occurred in their area of jurisdiction. The following is a summary of what each of the four women said in their statements, these summaries have been placed in chronological order that the incidents took place for the reviewing Justice’s ease of reading:
            a. Police File #: 2020973139 – Ms. R.B.
i.  Assault
1.         On the night of March 17th , 2017, she was at a St. Patrick's Day party in Lakeville at Cole Butt's residence;
2.         Two males got into an altercation at the party, one being a Mr. Aaron Cameron;
3.         She stepped into the middle of the fight to break it up;
4.         Mr. Fardy had been in a vehicle with another person, got out of the vehicle and said "where's my fucking girlfriend'';
5.         She and Mr. Fardy were dating at the time;
6.         Mr. Fardy found her, grabbed her by the throat and dragged her over by Mr. Cameron's truck;
7.         Mr. Fardy told her that she was "fucking disgusting" and she cried.
ii.  Sexual Assault & Assault
1.         Between the 25th of March and the 5th of April, she and Mr. Fardy were staying at Mr. Fardy's mother's home in Coldbrook;
2.         The couple were being intimate and Mr. Fardy got up and pulled her over to the side of the bed;
3.         Mr. Fardy asked her to perform oral sex on him;
4.         She said no;
5.         Mr. Fardy said "you're supposed to do this, you're my
            girlfriend";
6.         Mr. Fardy grabbed hold of her head and kept trying to push it down towards his penis;
7.         She would push away from Mr. Fardy;
8.         She yelled at him to stop because she was scared and he
            kept pulling her closer to him;
9.         Mr. Fardy almost had her pinned down on her side at this
            point;
10.       Mr. Fardy got super angry and started yelling at her;
11.       She kept telling him that she didn't want to give him oral sex;
12.       She got scared and called one of her friends to come and
            get her;
13.       Mr. Fardy overheard her conversation and told her that she needed to "get the fuck out of here" and to "shut the fuck up";
14.       When she walked towards Mr. Fardy, he grabbed her by
            both wrists and flung her on the floor;
15.       Mr. Fardy pinned her down and she was on the phone while this was happening;
16.       Mr. Fardy wouldn't get off of her but eventually did;
17.       She picked her phone up, hung up on her friend and left, and she never went back.
            b. Police File #: 2020972901 – Ms. E.L.
i. Sexual Assault 
1.         On May 12th, 2017, Ms. L. received a message from Mr. Fardy asking if she wanted to go to a party with him;
2.         Ms. L. had never hung out with him before but she agreed to go and Mr. Fardy picked her up;
                                    3.         The party was up the road from Mr. Fardy's mother's home in Coldbrook;
                                    4.         While at the party, Ms. L. got really really drunk and she blacked out;
5.         Mr. Fardy took her home to his mother's place;
6.         When she woke up the next morning, Mr. Fardy was on top of her and his penis was inside of her;
7.         Mr. Fardy told her that she was his now and then he would choke her and hit her while continuing to have sex with her;
8.         She told him to stop and began crying and she wound up going mute;
9.         It was at this point that Mr. Fardy stopped and drove her home;
10.       On the drive home Mr. Fardy got a ticket for speeding;
11.       She never consented to any of the sexual acts Mr. Fardy performed on her.                  
 
            c. Police File #: 2020973077 – Ms. C.O.
            i. Sexual Assault
1.         On June 15th, 2017, Ms. O. had a party at her home in Avonport which a large group of people attended;
2.         Ms. O. was drinking wine during the party;
3.         She began to feel the effects of the alcohol and she began dancing and kissing Mr. Aaron Cameron at around 10:00pm;
4.         Mr. Cameron and her had consensual sex next to a tree behind the barn that the party was taking place in;
5.         After having sex, she returned inside the barn and spoke
            with a few people before blacking out;
6.         She woke up later that night on the love seat in the barn that the party had occurred in;
7.         Mr. Fardy's penis was inside of her when she woke up, she was laying on her back with one of her legs and arms
            hanging off the love seat;
8.         Mr. Fardy was leaning into her having sex with her;
9.         She began crying and Mr. Fardy began apologizing for having "whiskey dick" as he was having difficulty continuing to penetrate her;
10.       Mr. Fardy then laid down on her and continued to have sex with her until he fell asleep;
11.       Once asleep, she managed to roll out from under Mr. Fardy and cried herself to sleep in an armchair;
12.       The following morning Mr. Fardy thanked her for a good night and left with a friend.
 
d. Police File#: 2020972659 – Ms. J.M. 
i. Sexual Assault 
1.         On March 27th, 2020, Ms. M. was home with Mr. Fardy, whom she was dating at the time, and two of her friends, Ms. N.T. and Ms. L.M.;
                                    2.         Mr. Fardy was drinking a quart of whiskey that night;
                                    3.         Mr. Fardy was belligerent and hurling insults at Ms. M. and her friends all evening;
4.         Mr. Fardy then called Ms. M.'s ex-boyfriend, Mr. T.O., and challenged him to a fight;
5.         Ms. M. tried to get Mr. Fardy to go to sleep as he had to work the next morning:
6.         Ms. M. and Ms. T. went to sleep in their room and Ms. M. went to sleep in the room she shared with Mr. Fardy;         
7.         Mr. Fardy was in the room and ended up sitting up on the edge of the bed where he began masturbating;
8.         Ms. M. asked Mr. Fardy what he was doing and he replied "just jerking it";
9.         She asked him why he was doing that and he told her "because it just felt right";
10.       She told him to go to sleep and it was at this point that Mr. Fardy climbed on top of her;
11.       She told him to stop it and Mr. Fardy said "you are going to get fucked whether you like it or not" and Mr. Fardy then held her down with his forearm across Ms. M.'s chest;
12.       Ms. M. began crying and told Mr. Fardy to stop;
13.       This went on for about 10 minutes;
14.       Once Mr. Fardy finished, he rolled over and went to sleep;
15.       Ms. M. cried all night until Mr. Fardy got up to go to work a few hours later.
 
9.         a. Police File #: 2020977101 – Ms. S.M.
i. Sexual Assault 
1.         Between the 25th day of May and the 10th day of June, 2016, Ms. M. was at a friend's house on Main Street in Kentville;
2.         The friend that she was visiting was Mr. I.L. and also present was Mr. L.'s roommate, Mr. T.P. and Mr. P.'s girlfriend, Ms. T.S.;
3.         Also present at the home that night was Mr. Fardy;
4.         The group was partying and drinking and she got pretty drunk;
5.         She went upstairs to Mr. L.'s bedroom and slept for at least an hour;
6.         She was awoken by having pain and when she came to, she realized that Mr. Fardy was having sex with her from behind;
7.         She was awake long enough to see Mr. Fardy's face and to feel that he was penetrating her vagina with his penis before she blacked out again;
8.         When she woke up the night morning, Mr. Fardy was gone; 
9.         She contacted Mr. Fardy via text or snapchat and asked him what had happened the night before and said that she knew the gist of what had occurred;
10 .      Mr. Fardy replied by saying "I was too high and horny".
 
Police File#: 2020972659 – Ms. J.M.
Ms. N.T. – interviewed by myself 
 
1.         During the initial stages of the COVID pandemic, she was living with Ms. M.;
2.         Their friend, Ms. L.M. was also living with them
3.         Mr. Fardy, who was dating Ms. M. at the time was also staying with them;
4.         Mr. Fardy liked his whiskey and was drinking whiskey that night;
5.         Mr. Fardy was saying offside things to Ms. M.;
6.         Mr. Fardy later got upset about seeing Ms. M.’s ex’s name, Mr. T.O., come up on his phone.
7.         Mr. Fardy went downstairs and messaged Mr. O. challenging him to a fight.
8.         She went downstairs to try to calm Mr. Fardy down;
9.         Initially Mr. Fardy settled down but a short time later he was playing music loudly;
…
Mr. T.O. – interviewed by myself
…
4.         He was at a friend’s house minding his own business when at 2:45am he received a message from Mr. Fardy;
5.         He messaged Mr. Fardy back asking him to call him if he wanted to talk;
6.         Mr. Fardy never responded so he called Mr. Fardy;
7.         He could barely understand Mr. Fardy on the phone as his speech was heavily slurred;
8.         Eventually he could hear two female voices on the phone and the line went dead;
9.         He wanted to go kick Mr. Fardy’s ass but he thought better of it;
10.       He received a call a short time later from Ms. M. accusing him of provoking Mr. Fardy;
11.       He plead his case and eventually sent them a screenshot showing that Mr. Fardy had contacted him first;
12.       He also had contact with Ms. M. the night that she broke up with Mr. Fardy in May;
            …
 
12. On July 30th, 2020, at 9:45am, Cst. Whiteway received a phone call from Mr. Fardy who stated that he would not be attending the Detachment as previously agreed. Mr. Fardy stated that he had spoken with a lawyer and because he had done nothing wrong, he did not have to attend the Detachment. Cst. Whiteway explained to Mr. Fardy that he was going to be arrested for the allegations made against him and that police were trying to extend him the courtesy and dignity of attending the Detachment to deal with the matters instead of having the police come and look for him and arrest him at home, his place of work or anywhere else. Mr. Fardy was then told to contact his lawyer again and to call back once he had spoken to him. 
13. A short time later, Mr. Fardy called back and indicated that after speaking to his lawyer, he would attend the Detachment to be arrested. Mr. Fardy advised that he would be at the Detachment shortly.
…
15. After his phone call with Mr. Conway, Mr. Fardy was booked into cells and his personal effects were put in a tray for safekeeping during his stay. Mr. Fardy’s Apple iPhone, that was on his person at the time of his arrest, was seized from his personal effects as part of the investigation. As Cst. Whiteway was seizing the iPhone, it vibrated and the screen turned on. Cst. Whiteway noted three text messages from an “Aaron”, who Cst. Whiteway believed to be Mr. Aaron Cameron. The messages were to the effect of “innocent until proven guilty”, “don’t say a fucking word” and “we’re gonna get you through this”. Mr. Fardy was secured in cells for a short period of time while members prepared to interview him. Mr. Fardy’s iPhone was sealed in an exhibit bag and placed in a temporary exhibit locker until it could be taken to RCMP Headquarters in Dartmouth to be secured in the Tech Crime Unit’s exhibit locker.
            …
SUMMARY
24. Based on the information provided in this affidavit, I have reasonable grounds to believe the following:
a.         That Mr. Fardy sexually assaulted five different women during a period of 4 years and assaulted two of the same victims during that same time frame;
b.         That Mr. Fardy committed two of the sexual assaults and all three assaults in the context of domestic violence as he was dating one of the victim’s and dating and living with the other victim at the time of the offences;
c.         That Mr. Fardy communicated with his victims via cellular phone including text messages and social media applications. This belief is based on the statements provided by the victims and the fact that Mr. Fardy was dating two of the victims and it would be reasonable to believe that Mr. Fardy communicated with both victims, Ms. B. and Ms. M., via cellular phone during their relationships;
d.         That Mr. Fardy was in possession of a cellular phone at the time of his arrest;
e.         That Mr. Fardy received text messages, that are relevant to the matters at hand, from a friend during the processing of his personal effects by the arresting officers;
            …
25. Based on the information provided in this affidavit, I have reasonable grounds to believe that a search of the following would provide evidence in respect of the offence being investigated:
a.         Based on my experience as a police officer and my own personal experiences in communicating with my spouse, my friends, my colleagues and my family, that in society today, we are constantly connected to our phones and we are in constant communication with others;
b.         Mr. Fardy would have been in communication with the victims or with other people around the time of the offences via his cellular phone;
…
d.         Mr. Fardy was in possession of an Apple iPhone at the time of his arrest and he received text messages from a friend directed to him that are relevant to these matters;
e.         The above noted date ranges have been sought as they are inclusive of the offence date plus 90 days from the date that the offence occurred in each circumstance. The offences in 2017 all occurred within a few months of each other and the final offence occurred in May 2017. These date ranges are being sought to capture any communications that occurred between Mr. Fardy and anyone else, after the offences occurred, but are limited to these short windows so as not to be overly broad.
26.       Currently the RCMP H Division Technological Crime Unit is the only unit in the Province of Nova Scotia with the ability to search electronic devices. Due to their workload, their unit may require up to six months before being able to search the electronic device.                                     [As appears in original]
Blended Voir Dire Evidence
            As noted above, in addition to attacking the ITO on its face, Mr. Fardy also says the search was overbroad and therefore unconstitutional.  The warrant did not authorize the police to search his internet history, yet the police seized that information from his phone.  
            The Crown concedes that there was no judicial authorization to search and seize the internet history, but says that since they are not relying on this information it has no bearing on the constitutionality of the search.
            Crown and defence advised the court that they wanted to proceed by way of a blended voir dire, as Mr. Fardy originally took the position that if his s. 8 Charter  challenge was unsuccessful, the evidence taken from his phone would be inadmissible in any event.  In this case the term “blended voir dire” refers to the attack on the ITO on its face; hearing evidence related to the manner of the search; whether the search was overbroad; whether the Crown requires an expert to give evidence about the cell phone extraction; and whether the evidence of the cell phone extraction can be properly authenticated.  
            Mr. Fardy said the evidence regarding the extraction of the cell phone contents requires expert testimony, and pointed out that the Crown did not provide a Notice of Expert in advance of trial as mandated under the Criminal Code.  The Crown said no expert is required to tender the evidence extracted from the cell phone. 
        Mr. Fardy also said the cell phone evidence is inadmissible because it cannot not be properly authenticated. According to him, the programs used to extract the evidence from the phone (Cellebrite and Graykey) have not been proven to be reliable.  The Crown disputed this position.  
        Following the blended voir dire, Crown and defence came to an agreement regarding the expert evidence and authentication issues. They agree that these issues are now moot and no longer seek rulings.  
        The sole issue remaining is whether s. 8 of the Charter was violated. Mr. Fardy is attacking the ITO on its face, and the Crown did not offer amplification. After the hearing, both parties asked me to consider selected viva voce  evidence heard on the blended voir dire on the issue of the manner of the search, that is, the allegations of scouring and/or rummaging through the phone, as well as the issue of lack of police note-taking during the search.  
        In correspondence dated November 14, 2022, defence counsel detailed the evidence he says is relevant to the manner of the search, in respect of each of the two witnesses called on this blended voir dire:
With respect to the evidence on the s. 8 voir dire, in addition to the warrant and ITO, the following are relevant in regard to manner of search:
Glen MacKenzie:
•         exported and provided all categories of data to the investigator, including location history, website searches, device logs, account details, etc. 
•         demonstrated that the user interface for selecting categories of data is clear and easy to use, i.e. simply check or uncheck the boxes for each type of data 
•         he could have overlooked the specified categories of data on the warrant when he exported the data 
•         no evidence of any safeguard to prevent overbroad export of private data
 
Cpl Chris Marshall:
•         he never reviews the warrant after receiving the data but in hindsight he should have done so 
•         did not keep detailed notes of what he reviewed, he only noted what he found interesting or possibly relevant 
•         he reviewed or scanned through every message of every conversation 
•         no evidence of any precautions to avoid breaching solicitor/client privilege
 
        In correspondence dated November 14, 2022, the Crown asked me to consider the following viva voce  evidence heard on the blended voir dire in relation to the manner of the search:
Section 8 – Facial Validity of ITO
 
Exhibit 1 – Search Warrant dated September 16, 2020
 
Exhibit 2 – ITO dated September 16, 2020
 
Section 8 – Overbroad Manner of Search 
Exhibit 4 – UFDR Report (2020)
 
Glen MacKenzie 
 
Direct Examination: 
-          In this case, he was asked to provide UFDR reports with different date ranges.  
-          Exhibit 4 is the UFDR for the 2020 date ranges 
o   When you open the program, you get the home page 
o   He created 3 UFDR Reports 
o   Exhibit 4 is a copy of the 2020 UFDR Report
o   Two Apple IDs detected on this device – both bearing the name of the accused 
o   Apple ID is “Jakob’s iPhone” 
o   Unique ID on extraction reports is specific to the device
o   Serial number of SIM Card on home page of UFDR matches the SIM card that was taped to the back of the phone 
o   Phone number for phone is 902-300-6117
o   “Case Information” on home page of UFDR is automatically created by Cellebrite.  The only things manually entered is the examiner name and case name 
-          Cellebrite parses the extraction and returns it 
-          Walks through extraction 
o   Used trusted forensic tool (Graykey)
o   Graykey plugs into device and into a monitor.  If it detects the device, it determines whether it can extract anything 
o   The interface opens on a monitor.  It is menu-driven. 
o   The program goes through options of what it can extract 
o   He then copies the extraction from Graykey to the PC and loads it into Cellebrite Physical Analyzer 
-          Once forensic image has been made, he opened it on PC in Cellebrite Physical Analyzer 
o   The looked at the warrant for type of data/dates 
o   Then he went through the report menu
o   He doesn’t look or sift through evidence 
o   UFDR reports are subsets of the main extraction 
-          Exhibit 4 (2020 UFDR) – there is a list on the left, you click on “Analyzed Data” which shows various types of data, including media, messages etc.  
o   The program itself automatically extracts this data
o   This report covers March to July 2020 (dates from the warrant)
-          Exhibit 1 (warrant), there is a list of 6 types of data
o   These items are covered by Exhibit 4 (2020 UFDR), but there are other items in Exhibit 1 that are not covered by warrant because Exhibit 1 is the whole shell of the extraction. If a box is not unselected, it would be included in the UFDR.  This could have been an oversight in this case.  
-          In this case, he received the phone from the evidence locker.  He took photos of the phone.  He looked at the condition of the device and did manual verification 
-          With a full extraction report, if there is any explicit content (child exploitation etc.), then he will advise the investigator and encrypt that data 
-          The UFDRs are provided to the investigator 
-          He doesn’t identify evidence contained in the extraction or UFDRs
-          If the investigator has issues with navigating the report, he can make himself available to walkthrough the report(s), but some don’t need it 
-          Intimate images were vetted at the request of the investigator 
-          When UFDR is created, he only does a cursory look to ensure that something populates 
 
Cross-Examination: 
-          Exhibit 3 – the data should only pertain to March to July 2020 date range 
-          He doesn’t know how the program decides if “user accounts” or something else that doesn’t have a date range are included in extraction
-          When you create a report, you get an option of “Data Types” to check on
-          He was asked why all of the data types listed under “Analyzed Data” of Exhibit 4 went to the investigator.  He stated that it was an oversight.  He doesn’t know if you can take certain things out – for example, “configurations”.  He also doesn’t know if “user accounts” can be turned off” but shows that it can be physically unclicked.  
-          He created 3 UFDR reports and provided them to the investigator.  Prior to sending them to the investigator, Cpl. Marshall came to the DFS office to do an initial review.  He set up Marshall at a reviewing station and provided the UFDRs.  
-          He doesn’t recall if Marshall looked at the main extraction or the 3 UFDR reports.   
 
Cpl. Marshall
 
Direct Examination: 
-          Fardy was arrested on July 30, 2020.  Fardy had an iPhone in his possession.  It was turned over to Cst. Whiteway from Fardy’s pocket.  
-          He drafted the ITO to search this phone.  September 16, 2020.  
-          The warrant to search the phone was approved.  The phone was already in DFU’s evidence locker.  
-          He filled out a form requesting that DFU conduct extraction.  He provided the form to his supervisor who approved it.  A copy of the form and the warrant were forwarded to Tech Crime.   
-          The form includes a brief overview, file number, name of the accused, court dates, if there was a passcode and the type of device 
-          The warrant authorized messages, call logs, social media apps, pictures, videos and emails to be searched 
-          The date ranges contained in the warrant included the offences dates and 90 days thereafter:
o   May 25 to August 25, 2016
o   March 17 to August 17, 2017
o   March 27 to July 30, 2020 
-          DFU contacted him in early November 2020 to advise that data was ready to be reviewed 
-          On November 5, 2020, he attended DFU and did an initial review of the data 
o   It was quick, not lengthy.  He made some notes about things that seemed relevant to the investigation 
-          He only reviewed the UFDRS within the date ranges of the warrant 
-          He reviewed texts – he was primarily focussed on any messaging, call logs, web search history, pictures and videos 
o   This was during the initial review
o   A lot of conversations didn’t seem relevant 
o   He didn’t look at any other types of data 
-          On November 12, 2020, he was able to dig a little deeper.  He found things that he thought were relevant.  He created PDF reports of text conversations 
o   He didn’t look at any other types of data outside of the warrant this day either 
-          He acknowledges that “web history’ is not listed in the warrant.  He explains that in any other investigation prior to this one, he’s only given the data available on the face of the data.  He hadn’t reviewed the warrant again before reviewing the UFDRs.  Every time he write warrant for phones in the past, he only got the data that he requested.  
-          When looking at pictures/videos, he noted intimate images.  He noted that vetting was required.  Another officer took this over, as Marshall was moving onto new role in RCMP.  
-          His objective when searching the UFDRs was to find any conversations between the accused and the victims or witnesses already identified and any others who were family/friends of the victims or the accused.  He ignored things that seemed entirely irrelevant.  
 
Cross-Examination:
-          This was his 95th judicial authorization 
-          He made handwritten notes that are in disclosure 
-          His notes included the particular text conversation and the name so he could go back and review 
-          Notes would have referenced how long the search was – 1-2 hours, maybe more  
-          He didn’t list all the data looked at, just what was of note 
-          It is not possible that he reviewed other types of data but not noted.  He recalls scrolling through the things that he did 
 
Law in relation to s. 8 of the Charter and Search Warrants
Section 487 of the Criminal Code:
        Section 487 of the Criminal Code states: 
487 (1) A justice who is satisfied by information on oath in Form 1 that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there is in a building, receptacle or place
(a) anything on or in respect of which any offence against this Act or any other Act of Parliament has been or is suspected to have been committed,
(b) anything that there are reasonable grounds to believe will afford evidence with respect to the commission of an offence, or will reveal the whereabouts of a person who is believed to have committed an offence, against this Act or any other Act of Parliament,
 
…
may at any time issue a warrant authorizing a peace officer or a public officer who has been appointed or designated to administer or enforce a federal or provincial law and whose duties include the enforcement of this Act or any other Act of Parliament and who is named in the warrant
(d) to search the building, receptacle or place for any such thing and to seize it, and
(e) subject to any other Act of Parliament, to, as soon as practicable, bring the thing seized before, or make a report in respect thereof to, the justice or some other justice for the same territorial division in accordance with section 489.1.
 
Breadth of s. 487
        In CanadianOxy Chemicals Ltd. v. Canada (Attorney General), 1999 CanLII 680 (SCC), 1 SCR 743, Major J., for the unanimous court, explained the need for a broad interpretation of s. 487 in the context of the purpose of a criminal investigation: 
20                              A primary, though not exclusive, purpose of the Criminal Code, and penal statutes in general, is to promote a safe, peaceful and honest society,   This is achieved by providing guidelines prohibiting unacceptable conduct, and providing for the just prosecution and punishment of those who transgress these norms.  The prompt and comprehensive investigation of potential offences is essential to fulfilling that purpose.  The point of the investigative phase is to gather all the relevant evidence in order to allow a responsible and informed decision to be made as to whether charges should be laid.
 
21                              At the investigative stage the authorities are charged with determining the following:  What happened?  Who did it?  Is the conduct criminally culpable behaviour?  Search warrants are a staple investigative tool for answering those questions, and the section authorizing their issuance must be interpreted in that light.
 
22                              The purpose of s. 487(1) is to allow the investigators to unearth and preserve as much relevant evidence as possible.  To ensure that the authorities are able to perform their appointed functions properly they should be able to locate, examine and preserve all the evidence relevant to events which may have given rise to criminal liability.  It is not the role of the police to investigate and decide whether the essential elements of an offence are made out  –  that decision is the role of the courts.  The function of the police, and other peace officers, is to investigate incidents which might be criminal, make a conscientious and informed decision as to whether charges should be laid, and then present the full and unadulterated facts to the prosecutorial authorities.  To that end an unnecessary and restrictive interpretation of s. 487(1) defeats its purpose.  See Re Church of Scientology and the Queen (No. 6) (1987), 31 C.C.C. (3d) 449, p. 475:
 
Police work should not be frustrated by the meticulous examination of facts and law that is appropriate to a trial process. . . .  There may be serious questions of law as to whether what is asserted amounts to a criminal offence. . . .   However, these issues can hardly be determined before the Crown has marshalled its evidence and is in a position to proceed  with the prosecution.
 
23                              Moreover, extrinsic factors such as the accused’s motive or the failure to exercise due diligence are often relevant to determining whether the event which triggered the investigation in the first place is criminally culpable.  Everyone, including accused persons, who lacks the means of obtaining and preserving evidence prior to trial has an interest in seeing that these facts are brought to light.  It would be undesirable if a narrow reading of s. 487(1) resulted in either inculpatory or exculpatory evidence being lost because of the investigators’ inability to secure it.  See R. v. Storrey, 1990 CanLII 125 (SCC), [1990] 1 S.C.R. 241, per Cory J., at p. 254:
 
The essential role of the police is to investigate crimes.  That role and function can and should continue after they have made a lawful arrest.  The continued investigation will benefit society as a whole and not infrequently the arrested person.  It is in the interest of the innocent arrested person that the investigation continue so that he or she may be cleared of the charges as quickly as possible.
 
24                              It is important that an investigation unearth as much evidence as possible. It is antithetical to our system of justice to proceed on the basis that the police, and other authorities, should only search for evidence which incriminates their chosen suspect.  Such prosecutorial “tunnel vision” would not be appropriate…
        Recognizing the need to balance this broad power to search against privacy concerns, Major J. continued: 
28                              There is no doubt that search warrants are highly intrusive, and that an investigation bearing on the issue of due diligence could, as Shaw J. pointed out in Re Domtar, supra, at p. 119, “entail a detailed inquiry into the affairs of a corporation over a period of several years”.  This Court has endorsed the importance of privacy and the need to constrain search powers within reasonable limits…
 
29                     The broad powers contained in s. 487(1) do not authorize investigative fishing expeditions, nor do they diminish the proper privacy interests of individuals or corporations.  This is particularly true with respect to personnel records which may contain a great deal of highly personal information unrelated to the investigation at hand.  Judges and magistrates should continue to apply the standards and safeguards which protect privacy from unjustified searches and seizures.  
 
29                              In this case, however, the specific terms of the warrant were not at issue, as the respondents challenged only the underlying authority to grant warrants for the purpose of investigating the presence of negligence.  In our opinion both a plain reading of the relevant section and consideration of the role and obligations of state investigators support the conclusion that s. 487(1) authorized the granting of the warrants at issue. 
 
Search of computers and mobile phones
        The Supreme Court of Canada has issued the strongest of cautions when it comes to the state listening to private citizens’ conversations or searching their computers and mobile phones.  It is against this background that the search of Mr. Fardy’s Apple iPhone must be considered.
        In relation to wiretaps of private citizens’ telephone conversations, in R. v. Araujo, 2000 SCC 65 (CanLII), 2 SCR 992, LeBel J., for the court, explained the need to protect privacy and to balance that against the need for effective law enforcement:
21                              The meaning of the investigative necessity requirement is of critical importance by reason of the conflict between the privacy interests involved in wiretapping operations and the needs of law enforcement agencies in their difficult fight against some forms of sophisticated and dangerous criminality.  Wiretapping is highly intrusive.  It may affect human relations in the sphere of very close, if not intimate communications, even in the privacy of the home.  La Forest J. was alert to the importance of the societal values involved in wiretapping and the risks to essential privacy interests.  Writing for the Court, in Duarte, supra, at p. 44, La Forest J. emphasized the potential danger to privacy rights arising from the use of such modern investigative techniques:
 
The reason for this protection is the realization that if the state were free, at its sole discretion, to make permanent electronic recordings of our private communications, there would be no meaningful residuum to our right to live our lives free from surveillance.  The very efficacy of electronic surveillance is such that it has the potential, if left unregulated, to annihilate any expectation that our communications will remain private.  A society which exposed us, at the whim of the state, to the risk of having a permanent electronic recording made of our words every time we opened our mouths might be superbly equipped to fight crime, but would be one in which privacy no longer had any meaning.  As Douglas J., dissenting in United States v. White, supra, put it, at p. 756:  “Electronic surveillance is the greatest leveler of human privacy ever known”.  If the state may arbitrarily record and transmit our private communications, it is no longer possible to strike an appropriate balance between the right of the individual to be left alone and the right of the state to intrude on privacy in the furtherance of its goals, notably the need to investigate and combat crime. 
        Ten years later, when considering state intrusion into personal computers, Fish J. recognized the resulting privacy concerns in R. v. Morelli, 2010 SCC 8 (CanLII), 1 SCR 253, where he said, for the majority: 
     As I mentioned at the outset, it is difficult to imagine a more intrusive invasion of privacy than the search of one’s home and personal computer.  Computers often contain our most intimate correspondence.  They contain the details of our financial, medical, and personal situations.  They even reveal our specific interests, likes, and propensities, recording in the browsing history and cache files the information we seek out and read, watch, or listen to on the Internet. 
…
     In my view, the repute of the administration of justice will be significantly undermined if criminal trials are permitted to proceed on the strength of evidence obtained from the most private “place” in the home on the basis of misleading, inaccurate, and incomplete Informations upon which a search warrant was issued.
     Justice is blind in the sense that it pays no heed to the social status or personal characteristics of the litigants.  But justice receives a black eye when it turns a blind eye to unconstitutional searches and seizures as a result of unacceptable police conduct or practices.
 
        The court expanded on the need to recognize privacy interests when it comes to state intrusions involving personal computers in R. v. Vu, 2013 SCC 60 (CanLII), 3 SCR 657, where Cromwell J. stated, for the court: 
                         The privacy interests implicated by computer searches are markedly different from those at stake in searches of receptacles such as cupboards and filing cabinets. Computers potentially give police access to vast amounts of information that users cannot control, that they may not even be aware of or may have chosen to discard and which may not be, in any meaningful sense, located in the place of the search. These factors, understood in light of the purposes of s. 8 of the Charter, call for specific pre-authorization in my view. 
        Then, in R. v. Fearon, 2014 SCC 77, Cromwell J., for the majority, extended these privacy considerations to mobile phones (in the context of a search incident to arrest, not as authorized by a warrant). He said: 
                         Third, the common law requirement that the search be truly incidental to a lawful arrest imposes some meaningful limits on the scope of a cell phone search. The search must be linked to a valid law enforcement objective relating to the offence for which the suspect has been arrested. This requirement prevents routine browsing through a cell phone in an unfocussed way.
…
                         There is a parallel here with the Court’s decision in Vu. A warrant to search a computer does not give the police “a licence to scour the devices indiscriminately”: para. 61.  Similarly, the fact that some examination of a cell phone is truly incidental to arrest does not give the police a licence to rummage around in the device at will. The nature and extent of the search must be truly incidental to the arrest in order for it to fall within the scope of the common law rule and respect s. 8 of the Charter. I agree with the courts of appeal in British Columbia and Nova Scotia that, generally, the search of the entire contents of a cell phone or a download of its contents is not permitted as a search incident to arrest: Mann, at para. 123; Hiscoe, at paras. 63 and 79.
…
                         Finally, officers must make detailed notes of what they have examined on the cell phone. The Court encouraged this sort of note keeping in Vu in the context of a warranted search: para. 70. It also encouraged that notes be kept in the context of strip searches: Golden, at para. 101. In my view, given that we are dealing here with an extraordinary search power that requires neither a warrant nor reasonable and probable grounds, the obligation to keep a careful record of what is searched and how it was searched should be imposed as a matter of constitutional imperative. The record should generally include the applications searched, the extent of the search, the time of the search, its purpose and its duration. After-the-fact judicial review is especially important where, as in the case of searches incident to arrest, there is no prior authorization. Having a clear picture of what was done is important to such review being effective. In addition, the record keeping requirement is likely to have the incidental effect of helping police officers focus on the question of whether their conduct in relation to the phone falls squarely within the parameters of a lawful search incident to arrest. [Emphasis added]
        In extending privacy considerations and protection to text messages between mobile phone users, in R. v. Marakah, 2017 SCC 59, McLachlin C.J. said, for the majority: 
                         In considering this factor, the focus is not on the actual contents of the messages the police have seized, but rather on the potential of a given electronic conversation to reveal personal or biographical information. For the purposes of s. 8 of the Charter, the conversation is an “opaque and sealed ‘bag of information’”: Patrick, at para. 32; see also Wong, at p. 50. What matters is whether, in the circumstances, a search of an electronic conversation may betray “information which tends to reveal intimate details of the lifestyle and personal choices of the individual” (Plant, at p. 293), such that the conversation’s participants have a reasonable expectation of privacy in its contents, whatever they may be: see Cole, at para. 47; Tessling, at paras. 25 and 27.
                         Individuals may even have an acute privacy interest in the fact of their electronic communications. As Marshall McLuhan observed at the dawn of the technological era, “the medium is the message”: M. McLuhan, Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man (1964), at p. 7. The medium of text messaging broadcasts a wealth of personal information capable of revealing personal and core biographical information about the participants in the conversation.
                         The personal nature of the information that can be derived from text messages is linked to the private nature of texting. People may be inclined to discuss personal matters in electronic conversations precisely because they understand that they are private. The receipt of the information is confined to the people to whom the text message is sent. Service providers are contracted to confidentiality. Apart from possible police interception — which cannot be considered for the purpose of determining a reasonable expectation of privacy (see Patrick, at para. 14; Wong, at p. 47; R. v. Duarte, 1990 CanLII 150 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 30, at pp. 43-44) — no one else knows about the message or its contents.
                         Indeed, it is difficult to think of a type of conversation or communication that is capable of promising more privacy than text messaging. There is no more discreet form of correspondence. Participants need not be in the same physical place; in fact, they almost never are. It is, as this Court unanimously accepted in TELUS, a “private communication” as that term is defined in s. 183 of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, namely, “[a] telecommunication . . . that is made under circumstances in which it is reasonable for the originator to expect that it will not be intercepted by any person other than the person intended by the originator to receive it”: see TELUS, at para. 12, per Abella J., at para. 67, per Moldaver J., and at para. 135, per Cromwell J.
                         One can even text privately in plain sight. A wife has no way of knowing that, when her husband appears to be catching up on emails, he is in fact conversing by text message with a paramour. A father does not know whom or what his daughter is texting at the dinner table. Electronic conversations can allow people to communicate details about their activities, their relationships, and even their identities that they would never reveal to the world at large, and to enjoy portable privacy in doing so.
                         Electronic conversations, in sum, are capable of revealing a great deal of personal information. Preservation of a “zone of privacy” in which personal information is safe from state intrusion is the very purpose of s. 8 of the Charter: see Patrick, at para. 77, per Abella J. As the foregoing examples illustrate, this zone of privacy extends beyond one’s own mobile device; it can include the electronic conversations in which one shares private information with others. It is reasonable to expect these private interactions — and not just the contents of a particular cell phone at a particular point in time — to remain private. [Emphasis added]
        More recently, in R. v. Reeves, 2018 SCC 56 (CanLII), 3 SCR 531, Karakatsanis J. for the majority, reiterated the need to recognize the highly intimate and personal information that can be found on a private computer: 
                         Personal computers contain highly private information. Indeed, “[c]omputers often contain our most intimate correspondence. They contain the details of our financial, medical, and personal situations. They even reveal our specific interests, likes, and propensities” (R. v. Morelli, 2010 SCC 8, 1 S.C.R. 253, at para. 105; see also Vu, at paras. 40-41; Cole, at paras. 3 and 47-48). Computers act as portals — providing access to information stored in many different locations (Vu, at para. 44; R. v. Fearon, 2014 SCC 77, 3 S.C.R. 621, at paras. 131-32). They “contain information that is automatically generated, often unbeknownst to the user” (Vu, at para. 42). They retain information that the user may think has been deleted (Vu, at para. 43). By seizing the computer, the police deprived Reeves of control over this highly private information, including the opportunity to delete it. They also obtained the means through which to access this information. Indeed, these are the reasons why the police seized the computer.
                          Given the unique privacy concerns associated with computers, this Court has held that specific, prior judicial authorization is required to search a computer (Vu, at para. 2) and that police officers cannot search cell phones incident to arrest unless certain conditions are met (Fearon, at para. 83). The unique and heightened privacy interests in personal computer data clearly warrant strong protection, such that specific, prior judicial authorization is presumptively required to seize a personal computer from a home. This presumptive rule fosters respect for the underlying purpose of s. 8 of the Charter by encouraging the police to seek lawful authority, more accurately accords with the expectations of privacy Canadians attach to their use of personal home computers and encourages more predictable policing.
        The police had prior judicial authorization to search Mr. Fardy’s phone.  The question is whether the ITO was sufficient, and whether the search went too far.
 
General framework for challenging the ITO
                   According to s. 487 of the Criminal Code, in order for a search warrant to be issued the police must have reasonable grounds to believe that there is, in the receptacle to be searched, anything that there are reasonable grounds to believe in the receptacle or place anything on or in respect of which an offence has been or is suspected to have been committed, or anything that there are reasonable grounds to believe will afford evidence with respect to the commission of an offence.
           Reasonable grounds are made out when credibly-based probability replaces mere suspicion. The police officer’s subjective grounds must be justified on an objective basis.  A reasonable belief must be demonstrated and must amount to more than just a hunch or a suspicion on a practical, non-technical, common-sense approach to the totality of evidence.  As stated by Frankel J. in R. v. Jir, 2010 BCCA 497: 
          As has been stated many times, the “reasonable grounds” standard is not only less than that required for conviction, but is also less than the civil standard of proof.  Madam Justice Wilson put it this way in R. v. Debot, 1989 CanLII 13 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 1140 at 1166:
The question as to what standard of proof must be met in order to establish reasonable grounds for a search may be disposed of quickly.  I agree with Martin J.A. that the appropriate standard is one of “reasonable probability” rather than “proof beyond a reasonable doubt” or “prima facie case”.  The phrase “reasonable belief” also approximates the requisite standard.
More recently, in Mugesera v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship & Immigration), 2005 SCC 40, [2005] 2 S.C.R. 100, the Court stated (at para. 114):
… the “reasonable grounds to believe” standard requires something more than mere suspicion, but less than the standard applicable in civil matters of proof on the balance of probabilities [citations omitted].
Further, as Mr. Justice Hill noted in R. v. Sanchez (1994), 1994 CanLII 5271 (ON SC), 93 C.C.C. (3d) 357 at 367 (Ont. Ct. (G.D)):
The appropriate standard of reasonable or credibly based probability envisions a practical, non-technical and common sense probability as to the existence of the facts and inferences asserted.
              A search conducted under the authority of a judicial authorization is presumed to be valid R v Pires; R v Lising,  2005 SCC 66, at para 30. The onus is on the party challenging the warrant to establish that it is not valid on a balance of probabilities: R. v. Cameron, 2021 ONSC 2154, at para. 66.
         In R. v. Araujo, 2000 SCC 65 (CanLII), 2 S.C.R. 992, LeBel J. explained the limited role of a reviewing judge: 
51                              The reviewing judge does not stand in the same place and function as the authorizing judge.  He or she does not conduct a rehearing of the application for the wiretap.  This is the starting place for any reviewing judge, as our Court stated in Garofoli, supra, at p. 1452:
 
The reviewing judge does not substitute his or her view for that of the authorizing judge.  If, based on the record which was before the authorizing judge as amplified on the review, the reviewing judge concludes that the authorizing judge could have granted the authorization, then he or she should not interfere.  In this process, the existence of fraud, non-disclosure, misleading evidence and new evidence are all relevant, but, rather than being a prerequisite to review, their sole impact is to determine whether there continues to be any basis for the decision of the authorizing judge.  
 
As I noted as a judge at the Quebec Court of Appeal in Hiscock, supra, at p. 326 C.C.C., even a basis that is schematic in nature may suffice.  However, as our Court has recognized, it must be a basis founded on reliable information. In R. v. Bisson, 1994 CanLII 46 (SCC), [1994] 3 S.C.R. 1097, at p. 1098, the requirement was described as  “sufficient reliable information to support an authorization” (emphasis added).  The Court concluded that this requirement had still been met despite the excision of retracted testimony.  In looking for reliable information on which the authorizing judge could have granted the authorization, the question is simply whether there was at least some evidence that might reasonably be believed on the basis of which the authorization could have issued.
…
54                              The authorities stress the importance of a contextual analysis.  The Nova Scotia Court of Appeal, while reviewing the cases from our Court cited above, explains this in a judgment dealing with problems arising out of errors committed in good faith by the police in the material submitted to the authorizing justice of the peace:
 
These cases stress that errors, even fraudulent errors, do not automatically invalidate the warrant.
 
This does not mean that errors, particularly deliberate ones, are irrelevant in the review process.  While not leading to automatic vitiation of the warrant, there remains the need to protect the prior authorization process.  The cases just referred to do not foreclose a reviewing judge, in appropriate circumstances, from concluding on the totality of the circumstances that the conduct of the police in seeking prior authorization was so subversive of that process that the resulting warrant must be set aside to protect the process and the preventive function it serves.  [Emphasis added.]
 
(R. v. Morris (1998), 1998 NSCA 229 (CanLII), 134 C.C.C. (3d) 539, at p. 553)
 
An approach based on looking for sufficient reliable information in the totality of the circumstances appropriately balances the need for judicial finality and the need to protect prior authorization systems.  Again, the test is whether there was reliable evidence that might reasonably be believed on the basis of which the authorization could have issued, not whether in the opinion of the reviewing judge, the application should have been granted at all by the authorizing judge. [Emphasis added]
        Therefore, the scope of my review is narrow and does not constitute a de novo review of the ex parte application. My role as the reviewing judge is not to substitute my assessment of the evidence for that of the authorizing judge. As Fish J. stated in Morelli: 
In reviewing the sufficiency of a warrant application, however, “the test is whether there was reliable evidence that might reasonably be believed on the basis of which the authorization could have issued”  (R. v. Araujo, 2000 SCC 65, 2 S.C.R. 992, at para. 54 (emphasis in original)).  The question is not whether the reviewing court would itself have issued the warrant, but whether there was sufficient credible and reliable evidence to permit a justice of the peace to find reasonable and probable grounds to believe that an offence had been committed and that evidence of that offence would be found at the specified time and place.                                                                                    [Emphasis added.]
        The authorizing justice is entitled to make reasonable inferences when determining whether the search warrant should issue and the informant need not underline the obvious. As stated by Cromwell J. in R v Vu, 2013 SCC 60: 
                         The question for the reviewing judge is “whether there was reliable evidence that might reasonably be believed on the basis of which the authorization could have issued, not whether in the opinion of the reviewing judge, the application should have been granted at all by the authorizing judge”: R. v. Araujo, 2000 SCC 65, 2 S.C.R. 992, at para. 54 (emphasis deleted); R. v. Morelli, 2010 SCC 8, 1 S.C.R. 253, at para. 40. In applying this test, the reviewing judge must take into account that authorizing justices may draw reasonable inferences from the evidence in the ITO; the informant need not underline the obvious…                                                       [Emphasis added]
        Mere conclusory statements by the affiant are not enough.  Facts must support the conclusions drawn, but the authorizing justice is able to nonetheless draw inferences.  As Frankel J. noted in Jir: 
          In the case at bar, to paraphrase what Madam Justice Rowles said in R. v. Ngo,  2009 BCCA 301at para. 60, the question is whether, on the whole of the evidence, the trial judge could reasonably have concluded, beyond a reasonable doubt, that Mr. Jir knew of the drugs in the trunk of the Sebring.  Also apt is the following from the judgment of Chief Justice McEachern in R. v. To (1992), 1992 CanLII 913 (BC CA), 16 B.C.A.C. 223, a case in which this Court held that it was open to the trial judge to infer that Mr. To knew that the closed bag he was carrying contained several million dollars worth of drugs:
19        The first question is whether the evidence permitted the learned trial judge to conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that knowledge on the part of the accused was the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the proven facts:  R. v. Cooper (1977), 1977 CanLII 11 (SCC), 34 C.C.C. (2d) 18 (S.C.C.) per Ritchie J. at p. 33.
20        In this respect, our function is not to second-guess the trial judge, but merely to examine the evidence, and consider whether the judge has correctly applied the law to the facts of the case. ...
. . .
41        It must be remembered that we are not expected to treat real life cases as a completely intellectual exercise where no conclusion can be reached if there is the slightest competing possibility.  The criminal law requires a very high degree of proof, especially for inferences consistent with guilt, but it does not demand certainty.  I do not think it could properly be said that an inference of knowledge in this case would be unreasonable or unsupported by the evidence.
        In R. v. Liu, 2014 BCCA 166, the court provided a summary of the approach a reviewing judge should undertake when determining a facial review of an ITO 
       I would summarize the main points from this jurisprudence in the following way:
•         The trial judge’s role in reviewing the validity of a search warrant is to consider whether the material filed in support of the warrant, as amplified on review, could support the issuance of the warrant.
•         The trial judge should examine the information in its totality, not on a piece meal basis, in a “practical, non-technical, and common sense basis”.
•         The question is not whether the reviewing judge would have granted the order, but whether there was an objective basis on which the issuing justice could have done so.
•         The appropriate standard is one of “reasonable probability” rather than “proof beyond a reasonable doubt” or “prima facie case”. The phrase “reasonable belief” also approximates the requisite standard.
•         Reasonable grounds may be said to exist at “the point at which credibly-based probability replaces suspicion”.
        If the reviewing judge determines that the inferences drawn by the issuing judge are reasonable on the facts disclosed in the ITO, this demonstrates that the authorizing judge could have issued the warrant and the warrant should be upheld.  Mr. Fardy has brought a facial challenge to the ITO on the sufficiency issue. The record on a facial review is fixed, involving a review of the ITO only.  As noted above, there is no amplification of the record in this case.  
        In relation to the meaning of s. 487(b), that is “will afford evidence with respect to the commission of an offence”, Sharma J. discussed the interpretation of this phrase in R. v. Abo Zead, 2020 BCSC 1970: 
     The Supreme Court of Canada has commented on the meaning of the phrase in paragraph (b) above, “will afford evidence with respect to the commission of an offense", in CanadianOxy Chemicals Ltd. v. Canada (Attorney General), 1999 CanLII 680 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 743 at para 15. The phrase is interpreted broadly. The Court notes that “the natural and ordinary meaning of this phrase is that anything relevant or rationally connected to the incident under investigation, the parties involved, and their potential culpability falls within the scope of a warrant.” In other words, the phrase in s. 487(1)(b) refers to any material that might shed light on the circumstances of the event that constitutes the offence.
        That said, a judicially authorized search must be conducted in a reasonable manner and must be no more intrusive than is necessary to achieve its objectives.  As noted by Cromwell J. in Vu: 
                          First, the police must obtain judicial authorization for the search before they conduct it, usually in the form of a search warrant.  The prior authorization requirement ensures that, before a search is conducted, a judicial officer is satisfied that the public’s interest in being left alone by government must give way to the government’s interest in intruding on the individual’s privacy in order to advance the goals of law enforcement. Second, an authorized search must be conducted in a reasonable manner. This ensures that the search is no more intrusive than is reasonably necessary to achieve its objectives. In short, prior authorization prevents unjustified intrusions while the requirement that the search be conducted reasonably limits potential abuse of the authorization to search. 
        Justice Cromwell went on in Vu  to explain that searching electronic storage devices can be tricky and warned that the imposition of protocols that are too restrictive risks creating blind spots in an investigation.  He said: 
                         Second, requiring search protocols to be imposed as a general rule in advance of the search would likely add significant complexity and practical difficulty at the authorization stage. At that point, an authorizing justice is unlikely to be able to predict, in advance, the kinds of investigative techniques that police can and should employ in a given search or foresee the challenges that will present themselves once police begin their search. In particular, the ease with which individuals can hide documents on a computer will often make it difficult to predict where police will need to look to find the evidence they are searching for. For example, an authorizing justice’s decision to limit a search for child pornography to image files may cause police to miss child pornography that is stored as a picture in a Word document. In short, attempts to impose search protocols during the authorization process risk creating blind spots in an investigation, undermining the legitimate goals of law enforcement that are recognized in the pre-authorization process. These problems are magnified by rapid and constant technological change.
        Mr. Fardy complains that the police scoured and/or rummaged around in his device for evidence beyond what the ITO would support.  For example, aside from the fact that the warrant did not authorize a search of his internet history, there was absolutely nothing in the ITO referencing pictures, videos, or emails.  The Crown says the ITO provided the issuing judge with enough evidence to allow inferences to be drawn to support a full search of Mr. Fardy’s iPhone, except for the internet history.
Generalizations 
        Mr. Fardy submits that the affiant’s assertions about people being constantly connected to their phones, advanced in support of the authorization, if deemed judicially acceptable, would essentially allow the police to search anyone’s phone, in any situation.  
        The paragraphs of the ITO that he complains about in this regard are:
a.         Based on my experience as a police officer and my own personal experiences in communicating with my spouse, my friends, my colleagues and my family, that in society today, we are constantly connected to our phones and we are in constant communication with others;
b.         Mr. Fardy would have been in communication with the victims or with other people around the time of the offences via his cellular phone;
        The defence makes the following submission: 
Aside from the isolated messages mentioned by E.L.and S.M., there is nothing in the ITO to specifically suggest that Mr. Fardy’s iPhone would contain evidence relevant to the allegations. There was no allegation that a device was used before, during or after the commission of any of the offences, or that Mr. Fardy made statements online or in messages that were relevant to the incidents. The July 30 messages that Mr. Fardy received from “Aaron” were plainly just words of encouragement from a friend arising from his arrest.
In many cases device warrants have been upheld despite a lack of explicit evidence that the device was involved in the alleged offence, because a reasonable inference could be drawn based on other evidence or the integral role of communication in the offence (for instance, drug trafficking, human trafficking and conspiracies).
The question is whether such an inference can also be drawn from the mere fact that everybody today is “constantly connected” such that it is now a likelihood, not merely a suspicion, that devices will contain evidence whenever an offence is alleged. Put simply, the premise of the ITO is that social media and messaging apps are bound to contain something relevant simply because devices are integral to our lives today.
But this is the very concern addressed by R. v. Vu and R. v. Fearon almost a decade ago: the immense capacity of devices to continuously capture and store personal information calls for more careful prior judicial scrutiny; not less. It was for this reason that a lawful arrest, although necessarily based on reasonable grounds, was considered to be insufficient justification for a thorough search of the accused’s device and the consequent risk of “wholesale invasion of privacy” (R. v. Frearon at para. 58).
The police request to search for data created 90 days after the date of the final allegation clearly demonstrates their intention to rummage around in the hope of finding something incriminatory. The ITO does not even remotely explain how or why evidence relevant to the allegations would have been generated in that period. Furthermore, police were aware that the allegations had begun to surface publicly and Mr. Fardy would likely have been seeking advice and preparing to respond to them, yet no protocol was put in place to prevent a possible breach of his solicitor/client privilege.
Once police had the warrant, they searched the device indiscriminately. No effort was made to restrict the search based on nature of the data, parties to communications, geolocation, etc. 
If the search of Mr. Fardy’s device is Charter compliant, it is very difficult to imagine what could possibly restrain the police in any other case. They may already be pre-printing ITOs with just one paragraph explaining that we’re all constantly connected.                                                                  [Emphasis added]
 
        In Morelli, Fish J., for the majority, considered generalizations about an offender’s propensity made by the police in an ITO. He said: 
These people all commit child pornography offences, but the “propensities” of one type may well differ widely from the “propensities” of others.  There is no reason to believe, on the basis of the information in the ITO, that all child pornography offenders engage in hoarding, storing, sorting, and categorizing activity.  And there is nothing in the ITO that indicates which specific subset of these offenders does generally engage in those activities.
To permit reliance on broad generalizations about loosely defined classes of people is to invite dependence on stereotypes and prejudices in lieu of evidence.  I am thus unable to agree with Justice Deschamps (at para. 162) that the ITO’s claims in this regard could properly be relied on by the justice.
…
That some child pornography offenders do seek out and hoard illegal images is, of course, neither surprising nor helpful in determining whether reasonable and probable grounds exist in a particular case.  Still, it is not the role of courts to establish by judicial fiat broad generalizations regarding the “proclivities” of certain “types” of people, including offenders.  Matters of this sort are best left to be established by the Crown, according to the relevant standard — in this case, reasonable and probable grounds for belief.  As suggested earlier, moreover, courts must be particularly wary of endorsing such generalizations when, as in this case, the crime alleged is the subject of intense emotional responses and widespread condemnation, and the temptation to rely on stereotype rather that evidence is therefore especially dangerous and strong.
…
While it may be true that the accused was adept at recording videotapes and storing the tapes for future use — as is nearly everyone who owns a camcorder — this says absolutely nothing about his propensity to store a completely different kind of image (child pornography), in a completely different medium (a computer, as opposed to videotape), acquired in a completely different manner (downloading, as opposed to filming).
The mere fact that a person collects, reproduces, or stores anything — music files, letters, stamps, and so forth — hardly supports an inference that he or she is of the type to hoard illegal images.  To draw that inference here is to speculate impermissibly.  At its highest, the proposed inference might provoke suspicion in some.  And, as a matter of law, suspicion is no substitute for reasonable and probable grounds to believe either that the appellant committed the alleged offence or that evidence of the offence would be found in his computer. 
…
In short, as mentioned at the outset, the ITO in this case is reduced by scrutiny to two links in the browser’s list of “Favourites” — links that were known to have been erased four months earlier.  At best, this may be a ground for suspicion, but surely the deleted links afford no reasonable and probable grounds to believe that the appellant was in possession of child pornography, and still less that evidence of that crime would be found upon a search of his computer. [Emphasis added]
        Broad generalizations about categories of offenders without evidence to connect those generalizations to the specific accused do not allow for a reasonable inference to be drawn.  However, is the ubiquitous use of mobile phones to communicate, whether orally or by text, really a broad generalization comparable to the alleged hoarding of images by pedophiles?  In this case the Crown says that there are specific facts which allowed the issuing justice to draw the requisite inference.
Ubiquitous use of mobile devices
        Connected to the generalizations of an offender in this case, is the notion of ubiquitous use of mobile phones.  In Abo Zead, Sharma J. discussed the search and seizure of mobile phones based on common knowledge of their widespread use, and reviewed the earlier decision in R. v. Ferguson, 2018 BCSC 490: 
     The ITO, the relevant portions of which are summarized at paras. 29–36, did not disclose any observations of the accused or his associates using cell phones. Indeed, the paragraphs in the ITO that conveyed the affiant’s belief that a forensic examination of data from the phones would assist in the investigations did “not provide any details or specifics on how, or in what way, the seizing officers thought ‘forensic examination and recovery’ would assist” (at para. 34).
     In support of the ITO, the Crown in that case stated that it was a “notorious fact that people today – especially young people – communicate extensively with mobile devices" and that they “take photos and videos using mobile devices” (at para. 60). The Crown noted that this material, if found on a device, could provide direct evidence of offences. The Crown went on to argue “that in light of this common sense reality, the authorizing justice was entitled to put ‘two and two together’” from the facts set out in the ITO and make reasonable inferences that were not specifically articulated by the affiant (at para. 61). These inferences included that the three men had been staying together for months, and so were associated with one another, and that they were in joint possession of the firearms.
     Justice DeWitt-Van Oosten agreed with the Crown and found that the ITO set out sufficient facts for the authorizing justice to make a number of necessary conclusions, which are listed at para. 74. Specifically, the court concluded that the relationship between the three men, particularly that they travelled to Vancouver together and had been staying together, was a reasonable basis upon which the authorizing justice could infer that they would have communicated during that time frame with mobile devices found in their possession (para. 75). The warrant was upheld.
     As part of her reasoning, DeWitt-Van Oosten J. relied on the following observation that the police are not obliged to establish with certainty that the requested search will produce direct evidence of the offence in question:
     Moreover, as explained in CanadianOxy Chemicals Ltd. v. Canada, I am to remain cognizant of the fact that s. 487(1) of the Criminal Code does not require of police that they show the search will produce direct evidence of the offences named in the warrant.
     Rather, s. 487(1) has been broadly construed and authorizes police to “locate, examine and preserve all the evidence relevant to events which may have given rise to criminal liability” for the named offences: CanadianOxy Chemicals Ltd. v. Canada at para. 22….
…
     The applicant acknowledges the ITO could be seen as outlining reasonable grounds to believe the applicant and F.J. were involved in suspicious activity linked to the physical supply of firearms to Mr. Samra. However, he submits the ITO does not disclose a single investigatory observation suggesting the applicant used his phone in connection with any alleged suspicious activity. On that basis, he submits the ITO is deficient.
…
     The Crown submits the absence of observations of the applicant using a cellphone is not fatal to the Samsung Warrant, pointing out that no such observation grounded the warrants upheld in Ferguson. It was sufficient that there were enough facts establishing an association among the individuals sufficient to infer they may have been involved in a joint criminal enterprise. Combined with the ubiquitous use of cellphones, the court was satisfied a reasonable basis existed for searching the phones.
     The Crown points out the ITO does contain observations of F.J. using his cellphone. Once during undercover operations in scenario 33. Specifically, surveillance video captured images of F.J. being on his phone on two occasions contemporaneous with his stealing back the firearms. Also, as noted above, he attempted to use his phone to make or answer a call during his arrest.
     The applicant submits that at best, the preceding observations amount only to a suspicion, rather than a reasonable inference, that F.J. made calls connected with the alleged firearms trafficking. He asserts little can be assumed about the purpose, topic, or recipient of the calls observed.
     I disagree. The law does not require an inference to be the only explanation of events observed for it to be reasonable; nor is it necessary to rule out innocent explanations of observations. Given the observations that F.J. contemporaneously used his phone as the guns (which he had been involved in putting in the covert vehicle) were stolen back, it would, with respect, defy common sense not to conclude such an inference was reasonable.
…
     In my view, viewed all together, the preceding provides credibly-based and reasonable grounds to support both warrants, notwithstanding the absence of observations recorded in the ITO of the applicant using his phone.
…
     The Crown further submits that even if the affiant had not explicitly expressed a belief that the applicant and F.J. would send and receive photographs, it is a logical inference that could be drawn, therefore open to this Court to consider. In Ferguson, the court held the failure to articulate an inference is not fatal (at para. 106). In that case, the ITO similarly did not explicitly mention possible multimedia. Justice DeWitt-Van Oosten concluded the issuing justice could have drawn that inference and specifically referred to the likelihood firearms were obtained from others as a basis for this conclusion (at para. 86). I find Crown’s position is sound.                                     [Emphasis added]
 
        As noted by Sharma J. in Abo Zead, in Ferguson, Dewitt-Van Oosten J. considered the ubiquitous use of mobile phones. She said: 
       Moreover, it is a “notorious fact that people today – especially young people – communicate extensively with mobile devices” and that they “take photos and videos using mobile devices”. This sort of material, if located on the devices, “could show communications, or associations, or photographs, or video, that provided direct evidence of the offences, or that provided evidence “respecting the commission” of the offences”.
…
       In addition to drawing these conclusions (or inferences), I agree with the Crown that given the relationship between Witness X, Gino McCall and the accused, including the fact that they knew each other from Hamilton, two of them travelled to Vancouver together, and all three had been staying at City Centre, with at least two of them in the same room, it was also reasonably open to the authorizing justice to infer that the three men would have been communicating with each other during this timeframe, including through the use of mobile devices found in their possession, direct or constructive.
       Between the F350 and room 127, police located six mobile devices. At least one of the devices was positively shown to be “active”; two of them were with the detainees as they travelled in the F350; and one of the devices located in room 127 had a British Columbia Area Code assigned to it (604), from which the authorizing justice could infer that steps had been taken to activate this phone post-arrival from Ontario.
       In R. v. Riley, O.J. No. 738 (Ont. Sup. Ct.) at para. 134, Dambrot J. opined it is “no great leap in logic to conclude that a man who commits a murder in concert with others to further the interests of a gang that is engaged in a gang war, will discuss the murder, however covertly, with his confederates”.
       In R. v. Pangman, 2000 MBQB 85 (CanLII), 8 W.W.R. 536 (Man. Q.B.) at para. 34 [cited in R. v. Riley], Krindle J. made a similar observation: “It is a reasonable inference that persons who are known to one another and who trust one another are likely to speak to one another about areas of mutual interest and concern”.
…
       In reaching this determination, I have reminded myself that an inference is a “deduction of fact that may logically and reasonably be drawn from another fact or group of facts found or otherwise established by evidence adduced at trial … [Moreover, a] single item or several items of evidence may give rise to more than one inference …”: R. v. Tsekouras, 2017 ONCA 290 at para. 229, leave to appeal ref’d, 2018 CarswellOnt 2055 (S.C.C.).
…
       Text messages and emails housed on the mobile devices would also logically afford evidence against which police could test the “defences” asserted by the detainees in their statements. For example, both Gino McCall and the accused denied knowledge of the fact that the F350 was stolen. All three men denied knowledge of the firearms, although two of them acknowledged seeing the suitcase at City Centre in the days prior to June 14.
…
    In that case, police obtained a warrant authorizing a residential search, including a search for documents that would identify the owners or occupants of the residence: at para. 4. At trial, it was conceded on the s. 8 voir dire that the ITO in support of the warrant “contained no statement concerning [the affiant’s] grounds to believe that documents evidencing ownership or occupation would be found in the residence”: at para. 14. [Emphasis added.]
    However, this did not preclude the Supreme Court from finding that a warrant for a search of documents in the residence could issue:
     The question for the reviewing judge is “whether there was reliable evidence that might reasonably be believed on the basis of which the authorization could have issued, not whether in the opinion of the reviewing judge, the application should have been granted at all by the authorizing judge … In applying this test, the reviewing judge must take into account that authorizing justices may draw reasonable inferences from the evidence in the ITO; the informant need not underline the obvious …
     The ITO set out facts sufficient to allow the authorizing justice to reasonably draw the inference that there were reasonable grounds to believe that documents evidencing ownership or occupation would be found in the residence: A.R., vol. II, at p. 112. In particular, the ITO referred to the premises to be searched as a “residence” and as a “two (2) story house” (p. 111). It also indicated that the appellant owned the property and that electricity was being consumed there: pp. 110-11. In my view, it is a reasonable inference that a residence would be the place to look for documents evidencing ownership or occupation. Where else would one expect to find such documents if not in the residence itself? Moreover, I think that the authorizing justice could reasonably infer that a place was being occupied as a residence from the fact that electricity was being consumed at that place and that it had an owner.
     I therefore conclude that the authorizing justice could lawfully issue the warrant to search for documents evidencing ownership or occupation of the property.
    As made manifest in these highlighted passages, inadequately articulated grounds to believe (or even an absence of articulated grounds), is not fatal to the issuance of a warrant if the facts laid out in the ITO allow the authorizing justice to reasonably draw an inference that grounds exist. I have found, in this case, that it was reasonably open to the authorizing justice to do so. See also R. v. Ali-Maliki at para. 14: “Sufficiency … does not require flawlessness”. [Emphasis added]
        Similarly, in R. v. Belcourt, 2012 BCSC 796, Macaulay J. stated: 
          Text messaging is a common, if not ubiquitous, means of communication between young people in particular. It is likely the least expensive form of cellular phone communication available and not surprisingly, the accused in this case used it extensively. A review of the text messages produced as a result of the production orders reveals many personal and intimate communications with their girlfriends. The review also reveals that texting was a means to communicate about criminal activities.
       The Crown has therefore put forward authority for the proposition that: 1) the use of texting and electronic communication between young people is ubiquitous and; 2) when interaction between an accused and others occurs where communication about the crime might be expected, an issuing justice can properly draw an inference that the use of mobile phones may have taken place, and searching the accused’s mobile phone may afford evidence.  
Persons involved in criminal enterprises speaking to each other
        The Crown relies on several cases where the inference has been considered proper that, as noted above, persons involved in criminal enterprises will communicate with each other.  Here we have only one accused, but he is alleged to have committed crimes in social situations where communication with the complainants might be expected.  Additionally, as a result of text messages that were sent to his phone at the same time as he was being arrested, he is alleged to have communicated with his friends via text about the alleged crimes.  Specifically, the Crown points to the text message allegedly sent by Mr. Fardy to E.L. asking her out; the text message sent by S.M. to Mr. Fardy asking him what had happened the night before, and his alleged text reply that “I was too high and horny”; Mr. Fardy’s texts to and calls with J.M.’s ex-boyfriend, T.O., harassing him and/or asking him to fight on the night of the alleged sexual assault on J.M.; and  the texts observed by the police being sent to Mr. Fardy’s phone from “Aaron” stating “innocent until proven guilty”, “don’t say a fucking word” and “we’re gonna get you through this”. The Crown says these messages provide a credibly-based probability that Mr. Fardy’s phone will afford evidence relevant to the offences.  
        With regard to the communications between Mr. Fardy and his friends, the Crown points to R. v. Pangman, 2000 MBQB 85, where Krindle J. stated: 
        It is a reasonable inference that persons who are known to one another and who trust one another are likely to speak to one another about areas of mutual interest and concern.  It is a reasonable inference that individuals finding themselves arrested and charged with the types and numbers of offences that these accused were charged with are likely to be concerned about what has just happened to them.  It is a reasonable inference that learning that a formerly trusted, high-ranking member of the organization was now co-operating with the police about the activities of the organization and its members is likely to be of concern to those connected to the organization.  It is a reasonable inference that such affected individuals are likely to talk about their common areas of concern.  The very argument used by the defence itself to allege state manipulation of the accused in the previous section of this judgment – namely, that if they are put together, of course they are going to talk, notwithstanding their expressed choice not to speak to the state – serves to underpin just how very reasonable was the inference drawn by Hewak C.J.Q.B.  In addition, it is a reasonable inference that observation of the dynamics of the interaction amongst 35 people connected to a structured organization and holding different positions within that structure is likely to provide evidence of that structure, regardless of the specific topic of discussion amongst them.                [Emphasis added]
        Similarly, in R. v. Riley, 2009 CanLii 7177 (ONSC), Dambrot J. discussed the basis on which an authorizing judge could have found that evidence of a murder in a gang war context would be obtained by intercepting private communications: 
      It is no great leap in logic to conclude that a man who commits a murder in concert with others to further the interests of a gang that is engaged in a gang war, will discuss the murder, however covertly, with his confederates. Added to this is the information contained in the affidavit that the members of the gang tended to congregate at Maxeen McPherson’s residence where they hung out after their shootings, watched the news in order to ascertain what the police knew, and discussed what they heard. They also hung out at the Head to Toe Beauty Salon and Dana Williams’ residence. Finally, the fact that Riley and Atkins had been arrested in connection with another gang-related shooting was likely to stimulate discussions about their jeopardy for that and other of their crimes. In all of these circumstances, there was a high probability that intercepting their discussions at McPherson’s residence, the beauty salon, Williams’ residence and elsewhere would assist the investigation into the murder of Charlton, and provide evidence of that offence. The authorizing judge was certainly entitled to reach that conclusion.
        That Mr. Fardy communicated electronically with his friends about the allegations was one logical inference available to the issuing justice, and even if the communications were in relation to possible defences, according to CanadianOxy Chemicals Ltd. v. Canada (Attorney General), that inference would support the issuing of the search warrant.
 
Overbroad search and seizure
        Mr. Fardy says the search of his phone was conducted in an overbroad manner.  In R. v. Barwis, 2022 ABQB 561, Labrenz J. thoroughly reviewed the issue of an overbroad search and stated:
          I accept that I have a responsibility to minimize a search that would otherwise be unreasonably expansive and in violation of an individual’s right to be free from unreasonable search or seizure as protected by s.8 of the Charter. As noted by Moreau J (as she then was) in Marek, relying upon Cory J’s comments at para 49 in R v Nova Scotia Pharmaceutical Society, 1992 CanLII 72 (SCC), 2 SCR 606, an analysis of overbreadth considers the means chosen by the state in relation to its purpose. The state must reasonably justify the necessity of its actions as measured by the objectives of the criminal investigation. The state’s interest in investigating must always consider and concern itself with the privacy interests of individuals. The state must impair those interests as little as possible.
          An example of overbreadth is found in R v Rogers Communications, 2016 ONSC 70. In the factual circumstances considered there, involving the investigation of several jewelry store robberies, the police sought and obtained production orders for all cellphone records for phones activated, transmitting, and receiving data through all of Telus’ towers proximate to 21 municipal addresses and 16 Rogers’ towers. Telus estimated that this would result in the disclosure of the personal information of at least 9,000 customers and Rogers estimated that they would be disclosing information regarding 34,000 subscribers. After finding a s.8 Charter breach, Sproat J at para 65, provided valuable advice and guidance to ensure that future production orders would be minimally impairing.
…
     As Cromwell J stated in Vu, there is generally no requirement for advance search protocols for computer searches. As Justice Cromwell further explains at paras 55-57, the manner of search is reviewed after the fact. In addition, the imposition of protocols would add significant complexity and practical difficulty and may actually “risk creating blind spots in an investigation” because it is difficult to predict in advance where relevant files might be found on a computer.
     At the same time, Justice Cromwell’s comments cannot be taken to mean that the police are permitted to indiscriminately explore every bit of data in the hopes that it may uncover even the smallest trace of evidence. This is particularly true where, as here, the police are limited temporally in relation to what data may be searched. A relevant example is found in the circumstances of Marek, where Moreau J considered  a search warrant relating to publication of obscene material on a website involving the murder and dismemberment of a human victim, Moreau J found a s.8 Charter breach because the police search of the accused’s computer was conducted in a manner so as to export thousands of deleted emails, photos, videos and an entire Internet history that had no apparent relevance to the investigation.  Justice Moreau stated at para 146 as follows:
The effect of the search of Mr. Marek’s personal computers was to export thousands of
deleted emails, photos, videos, and an entire Internet history which had no apparent relevance to the investigation. While a cursory search of all files in a computer was found to be justified in Jones [2011 ONCA 632], exporting this material for the use of investigators and eventually the Court without applying a temporal filter, a technology available to Cst. Gainor at the time of the search, went well beyond the purposes of the investigation as set out in the ITOs. Crown counsel submitted that the best evidence as to ownership and control could arguably come from the genesis of the Website. However, there was no evidence in any of the ITOs suggesting that the Website was first registered in the early 2000’s. There was, however, information relating to its registration as of 2012.
…
     In the present circumstances, however, the search of the accused’s electronics conducted by Det. Neufeld in his home violated the accused’s s.8 Charter rights. This is because the state’s search must be conducted in a manner that respects the promises made to the authorizing judge within the ITO.
        To the extent that the search captured the internet history, it was conducted in an overbroad manner. The Crown does not propose to rely on that evidence, as noted earlier. 
Failure to keep detailed notes
        Constable Marshall did not keep detailed notes while he was reviewing the electronic information retrieved from Mr. Fardy’s phone. In particular, he did not keep clear notes of his search of the web history, for which there was no judicial authorization to search in the first place. Mr. Fardy submits that this is another constitutional violation.  
        In R. v. Villaroman, 2018 ABCA 220, the majority stated, in relation to a police failure to take detailed notes:
          Nor can we conclude that any failure to take detailed notes of the manner in which the search was conducted constitutes a section 8 breach in these circumstances. The appellant relies on guidance about the importance of note-taking which the Supreme Court provided in Vu and R v Fearon, 2014 SCC 77, 3 SCR 621. In Vu, Cromwell J noted that the officer’s failure to take notes was “disquieting” and directed that “notes of how a search is conducted should […] be kept, absent unusual or exigent circumstances”. But he also noted this requirement was not a “constitutional prerequisite”: para 70. Later, in Fearon, Cromwell J elevated the requirement to take notes to a constitutional requirement in cases where a police officer searches an electronic device incident to arrest: para 82. Note-taking became mandatory in Fearon because the common law power to search incident to arrest is an “extraordinary search power that requires neither a warrant nor reasonable and probable grounds.” Accordingly, there is a heightened need for police to take detailed notes, allowing courts to engage in after-the-fact review to determine whether a search was lawful and conducted reasonably. Even when police obtain a warrant based on reasonable and probable grounds, there may be some cases where the failure to take notes of a computer search could give rise to an inference that the police conducted the search unreasonably. On this record, however, we cannot draw such an inference. The forensic examiner testified at length about how he conducted the search. The failure to take detailed notes does not appear to have undermined the appellant’s ability to meaningfully challenge the reasonableness of the search.
                                                                                                [Emphasis added]
        Unlike the search of an electronic device incident to arrest, there is no constitutional requirement that the police take detailed notes when searching an electronic device as the result of seizure under the authority of a search warrant. However, detailed note-taking is urged by the Supreme Court of Canada, and, depending on the circumstances, the failure to keep detailed notes might support the argument that a search of an electronic device under a warrant was unconstitutional.  In this case, Constable Marshall testified that he did not keep detailed notes.  However, the only evidence to which this omission is relevant is Mr. Fardy’s internet history, and the Crown is not relying on that.
 
Analysis
        I believe that it is reasonable to infer that people, including persons in their late teens and twenties (as is the age range here), use mobile devices to communicate ubiquitously, including the use of messaging apps. However, in order to search a mobile device, there must be more than that inference. And there was much more in this case. The ITO indicated that multiple complainants gave detailed statements alleging that Mr. Fardy sexually assaulted and assaulted them.  Mr. Fardy was charged with multiple counts of sexual assault and assault in relation to five complainants over a four-year span.  According to the ITO, he “was either acquaintances of or dating” the complainants in and around the time of the alleged crimes. He is alleged to have used his phone to ask out one of the complainants via text; to briefly discuss the allegations via text with a separate complainant; to harass the ex-boyfriend of another complainant and/or asked him to fight via text on the night of an alleged offence; and to receive text messages at the time of his arrest that imply that he had discussed the offences with his friend.
        There is clearly a credibly-based probability that Mr. Fardy’s iPhone would afford evidence relevant to the investigation, in particular text messages, or texting through apps such as Snapchat or iMessage, in relation to communications with E.L., S.M. and T.O.  Similarly, the texts from “Aaron”, could reasonably be inferred to be Mr. Fardy’s friend, Aaron Cameron, and one available inference is that Mr. Fardy discussed the allegations with him.  All of those communications achieve credibly-based probability on these facts
        In relation to the communications with the other complainants, as well as the authorization to search and seize communications with the other complainants, the relationship between Mr. Fardy and those complainants and the allegations were such that, considering Mr. Fardy’s use of his phone with E.L. and S.M., one inference available to the issuing justice was that Mr. Fardy and those other complainants communicated in a similar fashion. As such, there was a credibly-based probability that the messaging apps in Mr. Fardy’s phone would afford evidence relevant to the investigation.
        Despite the strong warnings from the Supreme Court of Canada against the police scouring computers and mobile phones for evidence, if there is a credibly-based probability that the device will afford evidence relevant to the investigation, then there is no constitutional violation.  Therefore, I must consider whether one such inference was available to the issuing justice in relation to the pictures, videos and emails stored on Mr. Fardy’s iPhone.  According to the ITO, Mr. Fardy was either in a relationship with each of the complainants, or knew them in some way, prior to the alleged sexual assaults. The ITO goes on to claim that he sexually assaulted the complainants, acted subsequently as if his interactions with them were reasonable, and communicated by text with two of them. One of the possible apps allegedly used between S.M. and Mr. Fardy, Snapchat, generally involves the sharing of pictures when sending a text. Nothing else in the ITO, however, referred to the use of Snapchat by Mr. Fardy.  As noted above, I agree that use of mobile phones is ubiquitous.  Historically, prior to the advent of mobile phones, so was the use of landline telephones and Parliament legislated very specific wiretap legislation to deal with listening to those conversations.  As the Supreme Court of Canada has stated, the information stored in mobile phones and personal computers is more private and personal than anything else in human history.
        This situation is not analogous to the cases involving gangs or criminal conspiracies, where the police affiant does not have access to first-hand knowledge of communications between the accused and other relevant persons, and therefore the issuing justice has to draw more strained inferences regarding modes of communication.  Nor is this analogous to the possibility that a child pornographer will try to hide images in other types of files.  In this case, the ITO contained detailed summaries of the complainants’ evidence, and those summaries did not reference emails between Mr. Fardy and anyone else, nor was there reference to photos or videos.  Some of the complainants alleged that they were impaired or unconscious when Mr. Fardy sexually assaulted them.  Of course, it is possible to suspect that a sex offender might take photos or videos of the complainant or the sexual activity in those situations, but this hunch would be akin to the “inference” that all pedophiles hoard images. As noted in Morelli, this would not be a reasonable inference supported by the evidence, but would be one based on improper propensity reasoning.
        Even considering the high standard of deference I must show to the issuing justice’s decision, considering the strong warnings from the Supreme Court of Canada regarding the elevated expectation of privacy in a mobile device, I do not think that a reasonable inference was available to the issuing justice to permit the search of Mr. Fardy’s emails, photos and videos. I agree that the search of his phone for photos, videos, and emails equated to scouring or rummaging through his phone looking for evidence on a hunch or mere suspicion. Mr. Fardy’s s. 8 Charter right were violated in that regard.
        In this case, the failure of the police to keep detailed notes while searching the phone under the authority of a warrant was not constitutionally required and on these facts is not a s. 8 Charter violation.
Conclusion
        The ITO supported the inference that there were reasonable grounds to believe that Mr. Fardy’s Apple iPhone would afford evidence of anything on or in respect of which any offence against this Act or any other Act of Parliament has been or is suspected to have been committed, and/or would afford evidence with respect to the commission of an offence. 
        The ITO supported the issuance of a warrant allowing the search of Mr. Fardy’s phone for messages (SMS, MMS, etc.); call logs; and social media application messages (Facebook, Instagram, etc.) between Mr. Fardy and the complainants, Mr. Fardy and related witnesses, as well as Mr. Fardy and his friends.  The search and seizure of those items did not violate s. 8 of the Charter.  There is no constitutional violation regarding that evidence.  
        However, on the basis of the facts presented in the ITO, no reasonable inference was available to the issuing justice allowing a search of Mr. Fardy’s phone for photos, videos or emails, and as conceded by the Crown, Mr. Fardy’s internet history.  Therefore, those items were seized in violation of s. 8 of the Charter. 
        The parties asked to have a separate hearing regarding a remedy under s. 24(2) of the Charter, once my decision was rendered regarding s. 8 of the Charter.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ns/sc/2023nssc3.html
            Daniel Jude Towsey is charged on a four-count indictment as follows:
THAT on or between the 31st day of December, 1995, and the 2nd day of January, 2005, at or near Halifax, Nova Scotia did unlawfully committed a sexual assault on J.M., contrary to Section 271 of the Criminal Code.
AND FURTHER that he at the same time and place aforesaid, did for a sexual purpose touch J.M., a person under the age of sixteen years directly with a part of his body, contrary to Section 151 of the Criminal Code.
AND FURTHER that he at the same time and place aforesaid, for a sexual purpose, invite, counsels or incites J.M., a person under the age of sixteen years, to touch directly a part of his body, contrary to Section 152 of the Criminal Code.
AND FURTHER that he at the same time and place aforesaid, did unlawfully assault J.M., contrary to Section 266 of the Criminal Code.
            The accused initially elected to be tried by judge and jury, however, has since re-elected, with the Crown's consent, to be tried by judge alone. His trial is scheduled to be heard April 3 - 6, 2023. In the meantime, he brings a motion seeking permission to attend his trial by videoconference. The court heard this motion on October 18 and 19, 2022, and the decision was reserved. In the very unusual and unfortunate circumstances of this case, his motion is granted. My reasons follow.
            At the outset, it is necessary to comment upon the manner in which the accused has framed his motion. The written materials refer to it as one brought pursuant to s. 714.1 of the Criminal Code. The section reads as follows:
714.1.  A court may order that a witness in Canada give evidence by audioconference or videoconference, if the court is of the opinion that it would be appropriate having regard to all the circumstances, including
(a) the location and personal circumstances of the witness;
(b) the costs that would be incurred if the witness were to appear personally;
(c) the nature of the witness' anticipated evidence;
(d) the suitability of the location from where the witness will give evidence;
(e) the accused's right to a fair and public hearing;
(f) the nature and seriousness of the offence; and
(g) any potential prejudice to the parties caused by the fact that the witness would not be seen by them, if the court were to order the evidence to be given by audioconference.
            Virtually all of the authorities cited by the applicant in the two briefs that were filed on his behalf, first by his former lawyer, and the second by current counsel, were decided pursuant to that section. With respect, this section applies to "witnesses". This is not a label that necessarily is applicable to the accused, who, in any event, cannot be compelled to testify if he chooses not to.
            As the Crown pointed out in its brief, and as counsel for the accused tacitly conceded during the hearing itself, s. 650 is the appropriate frame of reference, in these circumstances. The section reads as follows:
650. (1) Subject to subsections (1.1) to (2) and section 650.01, an accused, other than an organization, shall be present in court during the whole of his or her trial.
Video links
(1.1) If the court so orders, and if the prosecutor and the accused so agree, the accused may appear by counsel or by closed-circuit television or videoconference, for any part of the trial other than a part in which the evidence of a witness is taken.
Video links
(1.2) If the court so orders, an accused who is confined in prison may appear by closed-circuit television or videoconference, for any part of the trial other than a part in which the evidence of a witness is taken, as long as the accused is given the opportunity to communicate privately with counsel if they are represented by counsel.
            What does this all mean? There are different ways of looking at it. Section 650(1) requires that the accused be "present during the whole of his or her trial". This is said to be subject to subsections 1.1 to 2. The former subsection empowers the court to grant an order, if the prosecution and accused agree, permitting the accused to appear by closed-circuit television or video conference for any part of the trial "... other than a part in which the evidence of a witness is taken." The latter subsection appears to confer a broader discretion upon the court to permit the accused to be out of court during his trial.
            Given the sizable and ever-expanding improvements in technology since these provisions were enacted, some might argue that an accused who attends a hearing, has access to all of the exhibits, whose counsel is physically present at the hearing, and who is provided with the technology enabling him to consult with counsel, and for counsel to obtain instructions from him, is essentially "present" within the meaning intended by s. 650(1). Under this argument, a practical interpretation of that section, one which is consistent with current technological capacities, should not conflate the words "present in court" with being "physically present in court" during the proceeding.
            With that having been said, and as we have seen, s.650(1.2) does appear to provide the Court, in cases where the accused's proposed method of appearance is to be by way of "closed-circuit television or video conference", with a discretion (if the parties agree) to permit it, provided that the evidence of a witness is not being taken. The fact that Parliament made special provision for the use of this particular type of technology appears to somewhat blunt the force of the argument set forth in the previous paragraph. By necessary implication, it would appear that when the accused participates in the preceding via “closed-circuit television or vide conference”, he is not to be taken to be "... present in court" within the meaning of s.650(1). He is therefore considered to be "out of court".
            This brings us to s.650(2). This discretion, at first glance, appears rather broad. It reads:
650(2).  The court may
(a) cause the accused to be removed and to be kept out of court, where he misconducts himself by interrupting the proceedings so that to continue the proceedings in his presence would not be feasible;
(b) permit the accused to be out of court during the whole or any part of his trial on such conditions as the court considers proper; or
(c) cause the accused to be removed and to be kept out of court during the trial of an issue as to whether the accused is unfit to stand trial, where it is satisfied that failure to do so might have an adverse effect on the mental condition of the accused.
[Emphasis added]
        I also note that s. 715.23 provides:
715.23 (1) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the court may order an accused to appear by audioconference or videoconference, if the court is of the opinion that it would be appropriate having regard to all the circumstances, including
(a) the location and personal circumstances of the accused;
(b) the costs that would be incurred if the accused were to appear personally;
(c) the suitability of the location from where the accused will appear;
(d) the accused’s right to a fair and public hearing; and
(e) the nature and seriousness of the offence.
(2) If the court does not make an order under subsection (1) it shall include in the record a statement of the reasons for not doing so.
(3) The court may, at any time, cease the use of the technological means referred to in subsection (1) and take any measure that the court considers appropriate in the circumstances to have the accused appear at the proceeding.
        Section 650(2)(b) specifically contains the word “trial”, while s. 715.23 seems to deal with “appearances”. The word “trial” is not used. In any event, a prominent consideration is “the accused’s right to a fair and public hearing” (s. 715.23(1)(d)). Subsections (a)-(c), and (e) are non-exhaustive criteria which may inform the Judge in the exercise of her discretion as to whether the accused’s right to due process and fairness would be compromised. These factors, and others, are also pertinent to a s. 650(2)(b) analysis as well. 
        The overarching consideration, in a s. 650(2)(b) application, is that the accused receive a procedurally fair trial. Ordinarily, this will require the accused to be physically present. The discretion conferred upon the Court in that section is one which will therefore be sparingly exercised. 
        Mr. Towsey has filed an affidavit in support of his application. In paraphrase, the affidavit (and the medical reports that are exhibited to it) made note of the fact that he is currently homeless, and resides in a van by the side of the road in Hope, British Columbia. 
        He had been involved in a motor vehicle accident in November 2009. It occurred while he was riding a bicycle and was struck by a car. The vehicle actually ran over the right side of his torso, including his chest, abdomen, and pelvis.
        Among the many injuries that Mr. Towsey sustained, as a result of this collision, were multiple rib fractures, compression fractures, hematomas, a commuted fracture of the right proximal humerus, an avulsion fracture of the right elbow, injuries to his neck, left shoulder and upper right extremity, injuries to his back and right leg, as well as an intra-abdominal bleed.  He underwent an urgent laparotomy. 
        Despite the surgical interventions, rehabilitation assistance, occupational therapy, and other care that he received in the aftermath of the accident, it was considered likely that Mr. Towsey would retain some permanent disability. Indeed, a letter from his physiotherapist dated October 26, 2010 (affidavit, Exhibit “E”) refers to the fact that Mr. Towsey is "... currently ambulatory with rolling walker which he uses for balance and to minimize the jarring that goes up his legs and into his back. He can walk slowly without his walker on smooth, padded, flat surfaces ... but has minimal tolerance for walking on uneven services (i.e. sidewalks, shoulder road, hills, etc.)"
        On April 18, 2019, a social worker from the Chilliwack Mental Health Center (affidavit, Exhibit “F”) stated in a note:
Please be advised that Daniel [Towsey] has multiple physical disabilities that severely restrict his mobility and functioning, including problems with balance. He is a high risk of falling, especially when he is not walking a level ground or if he accidentally pushed. It is therefore risky for him to be too close to crowds of people. He is also unable to manage more than a couple of stairs without being at risk of falling. He relies on a mobility aid at all times. Daniel also has limited use of his arms. He requires help with carrying items. Please note he is unable to carry and balance a food tray.
        Mr. Towsey has also provided evidence (affidavit, Exhibit “G”) that as of July 5, 2021, he qualifies for the Fuel Tax Refund Program for persons with disabilities in the Province of British Columbia. He further deposes that he relies upon that disability benefit for his food, gas, his van, and all the necessities of life. He does not feel that his current medical condition allows him to physically travel, beyond very short trips in and around Hope, British Columbia. He further says that a trip from that town to Halifax would be beyond his capabilities, as it would require plane changes and possible layovers that would be beyond what he could physically endure. Finally, were he to travel to Halifax, he expressed the concern that he would be "homeless and without any financial means or support".
        The accused elaborated upon this evidence when he testified at this hearing (remotely). He said that he is unable to get an update on his medical condition, since no British Columbia physician (at least the ones with whom he has spoken) are willing to review his voluminous medical file and charts and write a report. He was of the further understanding that the Province of British Columbia is unwilling to fund such an exercise. He said that he is currently living out of his vehicle on a country logging road, has done so for about eight years.
        Moreover, he added that the fingers on his left hand were cut off in an accident with a wood saw. He cannot use that hand to hold onto anything to steady his balance as a consequence.
        Crown counsel stated that she took no issue with the physical shortcomings to which Mr. Towsey testified.  The Crown agrees that the Court is empowered under section 650 (2) to grant the order that the accused has requested, however, stresses that it is the Court which must be satisfied, in the context of all prevalent circumstances, that the accused will receive a procedurally fair trial, before it can consider granting same. Hence, this application is not one to which the Crown and defence can simply agree. Rather, it is the Court's obligation to ensure that the accused sustains no prejudice, notwithstanding his expressed preference to attend remotely by video conference.
        Although some similar considerations were dealt with in R v. Elgar, 2021 ABCA 327, that decision does not inform or assist in the circumstances of the case at bar. In Elgar, the accused had been facing charges of uttering threats, criminal harassment and extortion, but was initially found not criminally responsible on account of a mental disorder. He had been detained on full warrant at an Alberta hospital, and was subject to various conditions.
        His detention was expected to be reviewed on December 2, 2020, but before that could happen, Mr. Elgar absconded without authorization, and in fact had been missing for over two months by the time the Alberta Parole Review Board convened to review his detention. It did so by videoconference because of the Covid-19 pandemic restrictions which were then current. There is no indication that the Board considered adjourning the hearing or appointing amicus curiae to represent Mr. Elgar during it.  It simply considered the recommendations of the treatment team and, in the absence of the appellant, extended the full warrant, although it did modify some of the conditions to which he was subject.
        Mr. Elgar was apprehended on February 15, 2021 and stated that he did not find out about the decision of the Board until March 19, 2021.  He launched his appeal at that time.
        The Court, in the course of allowing the appeal, noted that section 672.5 (13) of the Criminal Code empowered the court or the Chair of the Review Board, as the case may be, to appear by close circuit television or video conference for any part of the hearing. However, it noted that the section expressly required the accused's agreement to do so before that section could be invoked. Since the only manner in which the proceeding could take place by videoconference was in the manner set forth in that section, and since the accused had absconded, obviously he had not agreed to conduct the proceeding in this manner, nor, in fact, did he get to attend it at all.
        This is obviously not a hearing “in respect of the disposition of an accused”, pursuant to ss. 672.84(1) or (3). So, the provisions of s. 672.5(13) are inapplicable. 
        In R. v. Colegrove, 2022 NSSC 9, Justice Brothers dealt with an application under s. 650(2)(b), albeit within the context of an accused wishing to attend a Charter application via video. He was, at the time, an inmate at the Springhill Institution, and proposed to appear from a secure room by way of a videoconferencing system regularly used for court appearances at the Supreme Court. He had provided an informed waiver of his right to be physically present, during the height of Covid-19 pandemic. Mr. Colegrove was unvaccinated at the time. The application was unopposed.
        In the course of her analysis, Justice Brothers noted:
20.  In Re: Court File No. 19/578, 2020 ONSC 3870, Lemon, J. was faced with a request from both the Crown and defence to run a trial over the Zoom platform, which would involve the accused being physically absent from the courtroom during the taking of evidence. The accused would observe through the remote video conferencing software.
…
22.  After reviewing the competing decisions in R. v. Candelaria, 2020 ONCJ 194 and R. v. Daley, 2020 ONCJ 201, Lemon, J. wrote:
22. Support for the parties' submission is found in R. v. Daley, 2020 ONCJ 201, at para 7. There, Monahan J. distinguished Candalaria by finding that an accused who is represented by counsel can expressly waive his right to be physically present during a guilty plea and sentence.
 
23. Moreover, Monahan J. interpreted s. 650 differently than Downes J. Whereas Downes J. found that the explicit inclusion of s. 650(1.1) and (1.2) in s. 606(5) precluded relying on s. 650(2), Monahan J. found the opposite. He wrote (at para. 13):
Subsections 650(1.1) and (1.2) permit the accused in certain circumstances to appear by video except where evidence is being given by a witness. However, subsection 650(2)(b) is even broader and permits the court to allow the accused to be completely out of the courtroom with no connection by video or audio even when evidence is being taken from a witness.
23.  The court went on to make the following statement, with which I agree:
I do not see Candalaria of any significance to my interpretation here. That case dealt with an unrepresented accused who wished to plead guilty by phone. Regardless of Downes J.'s analysis, this is an entirely different situation here. Similarly, in Daley, the issue was with respect to a guilty plea by phone but with counsel. I need not determine who is correct for my purposes.
 
24.  I also adopt the reasoning of the court as expressed in the following excerpt:
32. Edited to its relevant wording, s. 650 allows that an accused shall be present in court during the whole of his or her trial. However, the court may permit the accused to be out of court during the whole or any part of his trial on such conditions as the court considers proper.
33. Where the accused, his experienced counsel and the Crown all agree on the proper conditions of the videoconferencing for the purposes of the particular trial, a judge should be slow to hold up the trial. Here, however, I have an ample record to find that the factors enumerated in ss. 715.22-715.24 allow for such a trial.
34. The charge is to be tried by judge alone. There are few witnesses, few documents and few issues. All parties are committed to the Zoom process and sufficiently experienced to make it work effectively. Despite the nature of the charge, it appears that the complainant agrees with the process.
        She further added:
27.  Here, allowing Mr. Colegrove to appear by video ensures that he is not subjected to close confinement for extended periods of time. We know that if he were to be physically present in the courtroom for these voir dires, he would be subjected to a lengthy period of close confinement with only one hour out of his cell. The courts have been clear about such confinement, it takes a terrible toil on those subjected to it. I refer to Brazeau v. Canada (Attorney General), 2020 ONCA 184, Corporation of the Canadian Civil Liberties Association v. Her Majesty the Queen, 2019 ONCA 243; and British Columbia Civil Liberties Association v. Canada (Attorney General,) 2019 BCCA 228).
 
28.  This is a request by Mr. Colegrove on humane grounds. This should not be lost in the considerations. Further, the province is still in a state of emergency. As an unvaccinated individual in a correctional facility, Mr. Colegrove is vulnerable. This is also a factor to consider.
 
29.  We have used video links in all our case management conferences and in applications where no evidence was called. These have gone smoothly, and Mr. Colegrove has not had any problem hearing or seeing those in the courtroom. He has also had every opportunity to speak to and consult his very experienced lawyers.
 
30.  The accused is directed to alert the court immediately if he cannot see or hear the evidence or if he wishes to consult with his counsel.
        In addition to the authorities previously cited, I have also considered cases such as R. v. Fecteau (1989), 1989 CanLII 7144 (ON SC), 49 CCC (3d) 534 (OHC), R. v. Drubinsky (2008), 2008 CanLII 40225 (ON SC), 235 CCC (3d) 350 (Ontario Superior Court of Justice) and R. v. Zarubin (2001), 2001 SKCA 1 (CanLII), 157 CCC (3d) 115 (Sask CA).
        I have concluded that I am in agreement with the parties with respect to the effect of s. 650(2)(b). To the extent that the invocation of the section requires a waiver by the accused, he has provided one, in writing, which evidences a full awareness of his right to be physically present, in court, and his desire to give up that right without any pressure having been exerted upon him to do so. His counsel will be present physically, and will be permitted opportunity to speak with her client privately when necessary.
Conclusion
        I will grant the accused’s application, subject to conditions set forth below. In doing so, I have concluded that, to deny the accused’s request, in these comparatively rare circumstances, would effectively deny him access to justice. Mr. Towsey shall be permitted to attend his trial virtually, through video conference. That trial, which is scheduled to be heard April 3 – 6, 2023, shall commence at 1:30 p.m. (Atlantic Standard Time) which is 9:30 a.m. (Pacific Time) each day. Counsel have assured the Court that this will still provide sufficient time to complete the hearing.
        This is subject to the following provisos: 
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ns/sc/2023nssc25.html
            DCS is charged on an Indictment dated August 12, 2020, that he:
1.      Did between January 1, 2013 and January 31, 2020 at Lower Sackville, in the County of Halifax in the Province of Nova Scotia, did unlawfully commit a sexual assault on [R], contrary to Section 271 of the Criminal Code.
2.      AND FURTHER that he at the same time and place aforesaid, did for a sexual purpose touch [R], a person under the age of sixteen years directly with a part of her body, to wit, vagina, contrary to Section 151 of the Criminal Code.
3.      AND FURTHER that he at the same time and place aforesaid, for a sexual purpose, invite, counsels or incites [R], a person under the age of 16 years, to touch directly a part of his body, to wit., penis, the body of [DCS], contrary to Section 152 of the Criminal Code.
4.      AND FURTHER that he at the same time and place aforesaid, being in a position of trust and authority towards [R], a young person, did for a sexual purpose, touch directly the body of [R], a young person, with a part of his body, to wit., his hands, contrary to Section 153(1)(a) of the Criminal Code.
            The Crown evidence consisted of video and audio recorded statements obtained by the police from DCS; the testimony of the complainant, R (including a video recorded statement given to police and admitted pursuant to s. 715 of the Criminal Code); the testimony of R’s mother; and the testimony of three police officers involved in the investigation of the matter.
            DCS did not offer any evidence, as is his right.
            I am satisfied that the evidence establishes, beyond a reasonable doubt, that all of the alleged offences took place in the jurisdiction of Nova Scotia and that the alleged events occurred within the time frame set forth in the Indictment.  The identity of the accused was established by testimony in court from the investigating police officers and the video recorded statement of DCS.
Background
            R’s date of birth is February 4, 2002.  She is presently 20 years old.  DCS was born in 1969 (now 53 years old).  He began a relationship with R’s mother and lived with her, except for various periods of separation, from 2009 (when R was seven years old)  until his arrest in January, 2020.  For the last two years of this period they continued to reside separately in the same house.  
            The charges span the years from January, 2013 (when R was 11) to January, 2020 when R was 17.    
Admissibility of Video Recorded Statement of DCS
            Following a voir dire held at the outset of the trial, I ruled that the video recorded statement provided to police by DCS was admissible.  I stated then that my reasons for admitting the statement would be included in this decision.
            DCS contested the admissibility of the statement on the ground that he was a diabetic and that, as a result of not taking his medication before his arrest on the morning of the interview, there was a reasonable doubt as to whether he had an operating mind.
The Law
            The “Confession Rule” adopted by the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Oickle, 2000 SCC 38, is stated as follows: “confession will not be admissible if it is made under circumstances that raise a reasonable doubt as to voluntariness [on the part of the person making the admission]” (para. 68).  The Crown must prove the confession was voluntary beyond a reasonable doubt (para. 30). The “Confession Rule” inquiry is to be contextual and specific, turning on the factors of the particular case.  It involves consideration of “the making of threats or promises, oppression, the operating mind doctrine, and police trickery”: R. v. Spencer, 2007 SCC 11, at para. 12.  
        These general principles were recently reaffirmed by the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Beaver, 2022 SCC 54.  Justice Jamal, writing for the majority, summarized the general principles at paras 45-48:
(1)          The Common Law Confessions Rule
 
(a)           General Principles
 
                        The common law confessions rule provides that a confession to a person in authority is presumptively inadmissible, unless the Crown proves beyond a reasonable doubt that the confession was voluntary (Oickle, at paras. 30 and 68; R. v. Spencer, 2007 SCC 11, 1 S.C.R. 500, at para. 11; Tessier (SCC), at paras. 39, 68 and 89). Under the confessions rule, an involuntary confession “always warrants exclusion” (Oickle, at para. 30; see also R. v. Singh, 2007 SCC 48, 3 S.C.R. 405, at para. 38). But a voluntary confession need not always be admitted into evidence. If a voluntary confession was obtained in a manner that breached the Charter, it can still potentially be excluded under s. 24(2) (Oickle, at para. 30; Singh, at para. 38).
 
                        At the heart of the confessions rule is the delicate balance between individual rights and collective interests in the criminal justice system (Singh, at paras. 1, 21, 27-28, 31 and 34; Tessier (SCC), at paras. 4 and 69; Oickle, at para. 33). The “twin goals” of the rule involve “protecting the rights of the accused without unduly limiting society’s need to investigate and solve crimes” (Oickle, at para. 33). On the one hand, the common law recognizes an individual’s right against self‑incrimination and right to remain silent, such that an individual need not give information to the police or answer their questions absent statutory or other legal compulsion; on the other hand, the police often need to speak to people when discharging their important public responsibility to investigate and solve crime.
 
                        Voluntariness, broadly defined, is the “touchstone” of the confessions rule (Oickle, at paras. 27, 32 and 69; Spencer, at para. 11; Singh, at para. 31). Voluntariness is a shorthand for a complex of values engaging policy concerns related to not only the reliability of confessions, but also to respect for individual free will, the need for the police to obey the law, and the fairness and repute of the criminal justice system. Involuntary confessions can be unreliable, unfair, and harmful to the reputation of the criminal justice system (Oickle, at paras. 32 and 70; Singh, at paras. 30 and 34; Tessier (SCC), at paras. 70 and 72). A statement may be involuntary “because it is unreliable and raises the possibility of a false confession, or because it was unfairly obtained and ran afoul of the principle against self-incrimination and the right to silence” (Tessier (SCC), at para. 70).
 
                        The application of the confessions rule is necessarily flexible and contextual. When assessing the voluntariness of a confession, the “trial judge must determine, based on the whole context of the case, whether the statements made by an accused were reliable and whether the conduct of the state served in any way to unfairly deprive the accused of their free choice to speak to a person in authority” (Tessier (SCC), at para. 68). The trial judge must consider all relevant factors, including the presence of threats or promises, the existence of oppressive conditions, whether the accused had an operating mind, any police trickery that would “shock the community”, and the presence or absence of a police caution. These factors are not a checklist that supplants a contextual inquiry (see Oickle, at paras. 47, 66-67 and 71; Spencer, at paras. 11-12; Singh, at para. 35; Tessier (SCC), at paras. 5, 68, 76 and 87).
        The issue of whether the will of an accused had not been overborne by the lack of an operating mind was addressed by the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Whittle, 1994 CanLII 55 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 914.  The Court instructed that the focus is on whether the accused has truly been able to make a choice to give the statement:
45      The operating mind test, therefore, requires that the accused possess a limited degree of cognitive ability to understand what he or she is saying and to comprehend that the evidence may be used in proceedings against the accused. Indeed it would be hard to imagine what an operating mind is if it does not possess this limited amount of cognitive ability. In determining the requisite capacity to make an active choice, the relevant test is: Did the accused possess an operating mind? It goes no further and no inquiry is necessary as to whether the accused is capable of making a good or wise choice or one that is in his or her interest.
        The evidence established that DCS was diagnosed with diabetes in 2008.  He uses prescribed medication in pill form called Metformin and injected insulin to control his blood glucose level. On the morning he was arrested and transported to the police station, he had not yet taken these medications after breakfast (as was his routine).  Upon learning this from him at the outset of the interview at 11:38 a.m., the police returned to his house to obtain the medication.  When they provided him with what they had located in his bedroom at 1:11 p.m.,  he advised them they had brought the wrong medication.  They stated they would check again.  At 1:38 p.m. they advised they had looked where he told them it should be but it was not there.  He then advised that he could have left it in his car.  The police then checked the car and delivered the correct medication to him at 2:00 p.m. and he took the pills and injected the insulin.
        DCS did not raise any issue about not feeling well or having any difficulty understanding and answering the questions he was being asked at any time during the interview.  On the various occasions he was asked if he was feeling “okay” he replied in the affirmative.  I carefully observed the video statement. I did not observe any change in his appearance or behaviour suggesting any sign of impairment such as confusion, slurred speech or slowness of processing the question or providing an answer.  Both police officers who interacted with DCS during the interview testified that they observed no signs of impairment or difficulty understanding or responding to the questions.
        DCS did not call any expert evidence on the voir dire.  He presented to the Court a copy of an EHS Report prepared by a paramedic who was called to the Halifax Regional Police Cells at 5:17 p.m. on January 31, 2020 (the date the statement was taken).  The statement, taken at the Lower Sackville RCMP detachment, concluded at 2:58 p.m.  DCS did not call the author of the report to testify.  The Crown accepted the admission of the report but argued it should be given little weight.  On the face of the report, the paramedic author stated they were called by police to verify that DCS’s blood glucose level was adequate to ensure he was well.  The paramedic noted that DCS was alert to person, time, situation and place and was not in any distress.  All of his vital signs were normal.  His blood glucose level was measured at 8.6.  There is no evidence as to what this means.  It was noted that he had his short-acting insulin and Metformin with him and the police were directed by the paramedic to allow him to take his evening doses of both.
        In his testimony at the voir dire, DCS stated that, in his experience, low or high blood glucose levels could affect your mind or your way of thinking, your train of thought, your concentration.  He did not say that he experienced these symptoms during the course of giving his statement.  In cross-examination he said he saw changes in his behaviour, in that after taking his insulin he was more coherent, more calm and less anxious.    He did not specify any particular question or answer that he said was evidence of this behaviour. He stated that he had no concerns with what he said to police after he was given the insulin.  It is important to note that all of the admissions the Crown relies upon were made after he took his insulin.
        I am satisfied from the evidence that, at all times during the taking of the statement, DCS had an operating mind as described by the authorities. I find that the statement provided by DCS was voluntarily and should be admitted.
Admissibility of Video Statement of R pursuant to s. 715
        The police obtained a video statement from R on January 29, 2020.  R was 17 years old at that time. It was played during R’s testimony.  She adopted it as true and it was admitted as evidence pursuant to s. 715.1(1) of the Criminal Code, with the consent of DCS.
Governing Principles
The Presumption of Innocence and Reasonable Doubt
        It is not DCS’s responsibility to demonstrate, establish, or prove his innocence or to explain away the allegations made against him. He is presumed to be innocent until proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. The Crown bears this onus of proof beyond a reasonable doubt throughout the trial and it never shifts.  This burden requires the Crown to prove each element of each offence beyond a reasonable doubt (R. v. Lifchus, 1997 CanLII 319 (SCC), 3 S.C.R. 320).
Credibility and Reliability
        In R. v. CEG, 2021 NSSC 305, aff’d 2023 NSCA 1, I summarized the legal principles applicable to the issues of credibility and reliability:
        In Faryna v. Chorny, 1951 CanLII 252 (BC CA), 2 D.L.R. 354, B.C.J. No. 152, the majority of the British Columbia Court of Appeal discussed the credibility of witnesses. O'Halloran J.A. said:
11 The credibility of interested witness, particularly in cases of conflict of evidence, cannot be gauged solely by the test of whether the personal demeanour of the particular witness carried conviction of the truth. The test must reasonably subject his story to an examination of its consistency with the probabilities that surround the currently existing conditions. In short, the real test of the truth of the story of a witness in such a case must be its harmony with the preponderance of the probabilities which a practical and informed person would readily recognize as reasonable in that place and in those conditions...
        In Baker v. Aboud, 2017 NSSC 42, Forgeron J. gave guidance on the principles governing assessment of credibility:
13 Guidelines applicable to credibility assessment were canvassed by this court in paras. 18 to 21 of Baker-Warren v. Denault, 2009 NSSC 59, as approved in Hurst v. Gill, 2011 NSCA 100, which guidelines include the following:
* Credibility assessment is not a science. It is not always possible to "articulate with precision the complex intermingling of impressions that emerge after watching and listening to witnesses and attempting to reconcile the various versions of events:" R. c. Gagnon, 2006 SCC 17 (S.C.C.), para.20. ... "[A]ssessing credibility is a difficult and delicate matter that does not always lend itself to precise and complete verbalization:" R. v. M. (R.E.), 2008 SCC 51 (S.C.C.), para. 49.
* There is no principle of law that requires a trier of fact to believe or disbelieve a witness's testimony in its entirety: Novak Estate, Re, 2008 NSSC 283 (N.S.S.C.). On the contrary, a trier may believe none, part or all of a witness's evidence, and may attach different weight to different parts of a witness's evidence, Novak Estate, Re, supra.
* Demeanor is not a good indicator of credibility: R. v. Norman (1993), 1993 CanLII 3387 (ON CA), 16 O.R. (3d) 295 (Ont. C.A.) at para. 55.
* Questions which should be addressed when assessing credibility include:
a) What were the inconsistencies and weaknesses in the witness' evidence, which include internal inconsistencies, prior inconsistent statements, inconsistencies between the witness' testimony and the documentary evidence, and the testimony of other witnesses: Novak Estate, Re, supra;
b)  Did the witness have an interest in the outcome or were they personally connected to either party;
c)  Did the witness have a motive to deceive;
d)  Did the witness have the ability to observe the factual matters about which they testified;
e)  Did the witness have a sufficient power of recollection to provide the court with an accurate account;
f)  Is the testimony in harmony with the preponderance of probabilities which a practical and informed person would find reasonable given the particular place and conditions: Faryna v. Chorny, 1951 CanLII 252 (BC CA), [1952] 2 D.L.R. 354 (B.C.C.A.);
g)  Was there an internal consistency and logical flow to the evidence;
h)  Was the evidence provided in a candid and straight forward manner, or was the witness evasive, strategic, hesitant or biased; and
i)  Where appropriate, was the witness capable of making an admission against interest, or was the witness self-serving?
        Although demeanor should be given little weight in determining the overall credibility and reliability of witnesses, the court in R. v. Lifchus, 1997 CanLII 319 (SCC), 3 SCR 320, articulated some of the issues facing a trier of fact when assessing a witness’ credibility:
29 Nonetheless there is still another problem with this definition. It is that certain doubts, although reasonable, are simply incapable of articulation. For instance, there may be something about a person’s demeanor in the witness box which will lead a juror to conclude that the witness is not credible. It may be that the juror is unable to point to the precise aspect of the witness’s demeanor which was found to be suspicious, and as a result cannot articulate either to himself or others exactly why the witness should not be believed. A juror should not be made to feel that the overall, perhaps intangible, effect of a witness’s demeanor cannot be taken into consideration in the assessment of credibility.
        Care must be taken in differentiating credibility from reliability. In R. v. Morrissey (1995), 1995 CanLII 3498 (ON CA), 97 C.C.C. (3d) 193, O.J. No. 639 (Ont. C.A.), Doherty J.A. said, for the court:
33. Testimonial evidence can raise veracity and accuracy concerns. The former relate to the witness's sincerity, that is, his or her willingness to speak the truth as the witness believes it to be. The latter concerns relate to the actual accuracy of the witness's testimony. The accuracy of a witness's testimony involves considerations of the witness's ability to accurately observe, recall and recount the events in issue. When one is concerned with a witness's veracity, one speaks of the witness's credibility. When one is concerned with the accuracy of a witness's testimony, one speaks of the reliability of that testimony. Obviously a witness whose evidence on a point is not credible cannot give reliable evidence on that point. The evidence of a credible, that is, honest witness, may, however, still be unreliable. In this case, both the credibility of the complainants and the reliability of their evidence were attacked on cross- examination.
        As Justice Arnold noted in R v Hughes, 2020 NSSC 143, at para 59, Justice Doherty pointed out that the passage of time can affect the reliability of a witness’ testimony.  Justice Arnold went on to say, at para 60: 
       In R. v. H.C., 2009 ONCA 56, Watt J.A. discussed the difference between credibility and reliability. He stated, for the court:
Credibility and reliability are different. Credibility has to do with a witness’s veracity, reliability with the accuracy of the witness’s testimony. Accuracy engages consideration of the witness’s ability to accurately
i. observe;
ii. recall; and
iii. recount
events in issue. Any witness whose evidence on an issue is not credible cannot give reliable evidence on the same point. Credibility, on the other hand, is not a proxy for reliability: a credible witness may give unreliable evidence...
This case required the trial judge to assess the credibility of two mature adults, T.F. and the appellant, as well as of a child of ten, K.F. Credibility requires a careful assessment, against a standard of proof that is common to young and old alike. But the standard of the “reasonable adult” is not necessarily apt for assessing the credibility of young children. Flaws, such as contradictions, in the testimony of a child may not toll so heavily against credibility and reliability as equivalent flaws in the testimony of an adult... [Citations omitted.]
        The difference between credibility and reliability was helpfully explained in R. v. M.C.J., 2015 ONCJ 171 as follows:
In that regard I note the differences between credibility and reliability. Credibility relates to a witnesses’ sincerity, whether she is speaking the truth as she believes it to be. Reliability relates to the actual accuracy of her testimony. In determining this, I must consider her ability to accurately observe, recall and recount the events in issue. A credible witness may give unreliable evidence. Accordingly, there is a distinction between a finding of credibility and proof beyond a reasonable doubt.
        I must decide whether it is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that DCS  committed the offences alleged, or any of them. Probability is not sufficient. The standard in a criminal matter is that the Crown must prove the guilt of an accused person, in this case DCS, beyond a reasonable doubt - which lies somewhere between probability and absolute certainty, but closer to absolute certainty.
        In R. v. T.K.B., 2021 NSSC 221, I reviewed the legal principles applying to charges of sexual assault and sexual interference:
Elements of the Offences
  The elements of a charge under s. 151 were summarized by the Nova Scotia Court of Appeal in R. v J.D.C., 2018 NSCA 5: “that the complainant was less than 16 years old at the time; that the appellant intentionally touched the complainant either directly or indirectly...; and that the touching was for a sexual purpose” (para. 32).
 Touching involves intentional physical contact with any party of the complainant’s body and may be direct, for example by the accused’s hand, or indirect, for example by touching with an object.  Force is not required but accidental touching is not enough.  It does not matter if the complainant agreed to the touching.
  In R. v. Barton, 2019 SCC 33, Moldaver J., for the majority, reviewed the essential elements of sexual assault:
A conviction for sexual assault, like any other true crime, requires that the Crown prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused committed the actus reus and had the necessary mens rea. A person commits the actus reus of sexual assault “if he touches another person in a sexual way without her consent” (R. v. J.A., 2011 SCC 28, [2011] 2 S.C.R. 440, at para. 23). The mens rea consists of the “intention to touch and knowing of, or being reckless of or wilfully blind to, a lack of consent on the part of the person touched” (R. v. Ewanchuk, 1999 CanLII 711 (SCC), [1999] 1 S.C.R. 330, at para. 42).
    Because the complainant was under the age of 16 years at the time of the alleged incidents, consent is not an issue:  Section 150.1 of the Criminal Code.
    The Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the touching was done for a sexual purpose or in a sexual manner.  This was described in Ewanchuck as being done “in the circumstances of a sexual nature, such that the sexual integrity of the victim is violated” (para 24).
     In R. v. Chase, 1987 CanLII 23 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 293 the Court provided further instruction on this question of sexual or carnal context:
11      Applying these principles and the authorities cited, I would make the following observations. Sexual assault is an assault… which is committed in circumstances of a sexual nature, such that the sexual integrity of the victim is violated. The test to be applied in determining whether the impugned conduct has the requisite sexual nature is an objective one: "Viewed in the light of all the circumstances, is the sexual or carnal context of the assault visible to a reasonable observer?"… The part of the body touched, the nature of the contact, the situation in which it occurred, the words and gestures accompanying the act, and all other circumstances surrounding the conduct, including threats, which may or may not be accompanied by force, will be relevant... The intent or purpose of the person committing the act, to the extent that this may appear from the evidence, may also be a factor in considering whether the conduct is sexual. If the motive of the accused is sexual gratification, to the extent that this may appear from the evidence it may be a factor in determining whether the conduct is sexual. It must be emphasized, however, that the existence of such a motive is simply one of many factors to be considered, the importance of which will vary depending on the circumstances.
[Citations removed]
     The interaction of charges of sexual interference and sexual assault was recently considered by the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. R.V., 2021 SCC 10.  Justice Moldaver, writing for the majority, was addressing this issue in the context of inconsistent jury verdicts.  At paras 51 to 53 he said:
  Sections 151 , 152  and 271  of the Criminal Code  use different terms to describe similar acts. Sexual interference under s. 151  requires proof of touching, and invitation to sexual touching under s. 152  requires proof that the accused counselled, invited or incited the complainant to touch. Sexual assault, for its part, is not defined under s. 271 . Instead, sexual assault is a s. 265(1)  assault made applicable to sexual circumstances by s. 265(2) . A person commits a sexual assault by applying force intentionally to another person, directly or indirectly, in circumstances of a sexual nature (Criminal Code, s. 265(1) (a); R. v. Chase, 1987 CanLII 23 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 293, at p. 302; R. v. Ewanchuk, 1999 CanLII 711 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 330, at para. 24).
    The word “force” is commonly understood to mean physical strength, “violence, compulsion, or constraint exerted upon or against a person” (R. v. Barton, 2017 ABCA 216, 55 Alta. L.R. (6th) 1, at para. 202, aff’d 2019 SCC 33, citing Merriam‑Webster Dictionary (online)). However, as a legal term of art, the element of force has been interpreted to include any form of touching (R. v. Cuerrier, 1998 CanLII 796 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 371, at para. 10; Ewanchuk, at paras. 23‑25; R. v. J.A., 2011 SCC 28, 2 S.C.R. 440, at para. 23). Put simply, although the words “touch” or “touching” and “force” are distinct, in some circumstances, including those that apply here, they mean the same thing in law.
 
Analysis
        I will address the charges in the order by which the Crown made submissions.
Count 2
        As stated, the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt the essential elements of a charge under s. 151 of the Criminal Code:
1.      That R was under the age of 16 years at the time;
2.      That DCS intentionally touched R;
3.      That the touching was for a sexual purpose.
        In the spring of 2013, when R was 11 years old, her mother and DCS were displaced from the home they were renting due to water damage to the home.  They moved into the Ramada Hotel in Dartmouth for approximately one month.  R and DCS were alone in the hotel room one day.  They were “play fighting” on the bed with DCS trying to push R off the bed and R resisting.  She was wearing a tee shirt and purple shorts over a bathing suit (the hotel had a pool).  She told the police during her video statement and testified that at one point DCS put his hand on her vagina over her shorts.  She says she froze and said “Oww”.  She then ran to the bathroom.  She said that she was only 11 years old but she knew that this was wrong.
        In her statement she said that his hand rubbed her vagina over her clothes for about 20 seconds.  She also told police that she remembers that she was wearing her purple shorts because she never wore them again – she placed them in a bag of clothes for donation when they returned to their home.
        In cross-examination by Mr. Linh, R said that she did not think that DCS putting his hand on her vagina over her clothes was an accident. She did not confront DCS about it at the time.
        In his video statement, DCS told police that he recalled the incident at the Ramada.  He recalled R wearing shorts.  He acknowledged that pushing her on her back, belly and leg made him feel good and it was for his own gratification.  He denies putting his hand on her vagina or rubbing her vagina over her clothing. After revealing that he was a victim of sexual assault when he was a youth, DCS told the police about the events at the Ramada (pp. 165-169):
A.        …sex to me had become anything to make [his memory of his own sexual abuse]go away, if that makes any sense to you
Q.        Yeah, yeah, it does, yeah.
A.        Yeah, I just wanted it to go away.  So it was … I would do anything to have sex, I guess almost anything, to make myself forget about [his own sexual assault abuse].  I’d feel good but at the same time…
Q.        Okay.
A.        …make myself forget about it
Q.        Yeah, yeah.
A.        Yeah. Because I wasn’t gay, I wasn’t …
Q.        Un-huh.
A.        … you know, and so that’s how it started.
…
Q.        Okay, okay, and so what kind of … that incident like with [R] in the hotel room at the Ramada …
A.        Yeah.
Q.        … tell me about that, like what was, you know, going on that kind of led you to that?
A.        Well, we always wrestled on the bed…
Q.        Yeah.
A.        … and stuff and just I don’t know, I just wanted to fell good I guess, and just …
Q.        Uh-huh.
A.        … you know …
Q.        Uh-huh.
A.        … push her off the bed.
Q.        Okay.
A.        Yeah.
Q.        And so then you pushed her off the bed, do you remember like how …what happened after that like?
A.        I was … I think I was trying to get her up and go to school and …
Q.        Uh-huh.
A.        … I was just pushing on her to … to get up to go to school, bugging her more than anything.
Q.        Okay.
A.        It’s for my own gratification because it made me feel good I guess and …
Q.        What made you feel good like?
A.        Just touching on her.  My girlfriend wasn’t very sexual towards me at all.
Q.        Okay.
A.        Yeah.
Q.        Okay.  So when you … you say that you were touching on her …
A.        Yeah.
Q.        … like what do you mean by that?
A.        Just pushing, pushing on her.
Q.        Pushing.
A.        Pushing on her …
Q.        Okay.
A.        … back or on her whatever, her belly and …
Q.        Yeah.
A.        … her leg.
Q.        Her leg.
A.        She said her pussy but it was more of her leg, I was pushing her like that, so.
Q.        Okay.
A.        Yeah.
Q.        So what about her saying she remembers your hand like just kind of on top of her clothing like around …
A.        No.
Q.        … her vagina.
A.        No, it wasn’t underneath, no, but obviously …
Q.        No, no, she never said it was underneath …
A.        Yeah.
Q.        …it was on …
A.        Yeah.
Q.        … top.
A.        Yeah, no.
Q.        Like …
A.        I was … I was pushing on her just like that to get off the bed, right …
Q.        Okay.
A.        … and just yeah.
Q.        Okay.
A.        No, it wasn’t  … it wasn’t like that like that.
Q.        Uh-huh, uh-huh.
A.        Yeah.
Q.        And like do you remember rubbing her like …
A.        No.
Q.        … like moving your hand up and down?
A.        No, no, no, I never did that, no.
Q.        No.
A.        Just like pushing, pushing.
Q.        Okay.
A.        Yeah …
Q.        Do you remember…
A.        … on her hips and like go on her hip and her …
Q.        Okay.
A.        … shoulder and …
Q.        Okay.
A.        Yeah.
Q.        Do you remember what she was wearing that day?
A.        I believe it was shorts I believe …
Q.        Yeah.
A.        … of some sort.
Q.        You don’t remember any …
A.        No.
Q.        … details?
A.        No, I don’t remember.
Q.        Okay.  So then tell me how it kind of …so from there like whenever that was happening, how did that make you feel like?  You said it made you …
A.        My guess it made me feel good I guess, yeah.
 
        I found the evidence of R, as to this event, to be credible and reliable.  Although she was only 11 years old, her recall of what she was wearing and her reaction to the event by never again wearing the purple shorts provides support to the reliability of her recollection of the event.  Her evidence during the police interview and on the witness stand was both internally and externally consistent and not altered in any way by cross-examination.  Although she was soft-spoken in both the interview and in her testimony (although to a lesser extent), she answered all questions without hesitation.
        I am guided by the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. W. (D.), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 742. The instruction in considering evidence in such cases is:
1.      If the evidence of the accused is believed, he must be acquitted;
2.      If the evidence of the accused is not believed, but the evidence still raises or leaves a reasonable doubt, he must be acquitted; and,
3.      Even if the evidence of the accused does not raise a reasonable doubt, he must be acquitted if a reasonable doubt is raised by other evidence that is accepted. In order to convict, the evidence that the court does accept must prove his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
        If DCS did touch R’s vagina, I am left with a reasonable doubt that it was intentional.  However, that does not conclude the matter.  The Crown has proved each of the essential elements of s. 151 beyond a reasonable doubt.  The complainant was under the age of 16 years at the time of the offence.  The touching does not have to be of a sexual organ to satisfy the element of touching.  Although he denies touching R’s vagina, DCS admits that the touching of other parts of her body was intentional and for a sexual purpose: it made him “feel good” and it was for his gratification.  
        I find DCS guilty of the charge under s. 151.
Count 3
        This is a charge under s. 152 of the Criminal Code.  For DCS to be found guilty of this charge, the Crown must prove each of these essential elements beyond a reasonable doubt:
1.      That R was under the age of 16 years at the time;
2.      That DCS invited R to touch his penis;
3.      That the touching that DCS invited was for a sexual purpose.
        R told the police during her interview that, when she was 15 years old, DCS requested that she masturbate him.  These incidents began when he was driving her in his car and also occurred later in his bedroom at their home.  These incidents continued after she turned 16 years old.
        When R was 14 years old, DCS began providing her with weed, cigarettes and alcohol.  Sometimes he would offer it to her and sometimes she would ask him for it.  He later began to suggest that, in return for providing her with these goods or driving her somewhere, she should show him her “pussy” or give him a “blow job”.  Each time she refused. 
        At the time of providing her statement to police, she denied ever touching his penis.  She testified that she subsequently gave an additional statement to police (not in evidence) in which she acknowledged that, in exchange for liquor or weed, she would touch him.  She said this began when she was 15.  The first time was in his car and he told her he would put on a condom so that she would not have to make direct contact with his penis.  He told her he would buy her liquor if she followed through with masturbating him.  He ejaculated into the condom and disposed of it out the car window.  During these interactions he did not say anything specific to her.
        In cross-examination she stated that these masturbation events took place while she was attending […] High School.  She said she could not recall if she performed any sexual acts prior to attending […] High School.
        Based on this answer, DCS argued that she could not have been 15 years old at the time.
        In his statement to police, DCS admitted to these events taking place but said that they had only started within the past year.
        The evidence of R’s attendance at school is vague and unreliable.  In cross-examination she acknowledged that she did not attend school regularly.  She stated that she stopped attending school when she was in grade ten (but met twice per week with a teacher).  There is no clear evidence as to how old she was when she began to attend […] High School or what grade she was in when she began attending there.
        I am left with a reasonable doubt that any of these events occurred when she was under the age of 16 years. 
        I find DCS not guilty of the charge in Count 3.
Count 4
        This is a charge under s. 153(1)(a) of the Criminal Code.  For DCS to be found guilty of this charge the Crown must prove each of these essential elements beyond a reasonable doubt:
1.      That R was a “young person” at the time.  A “young person” is someone who is 16 years old or more but less than 18 years old;
2.      That DCS touched R;
3.      That the touching was for a sexual purpose;
4.      That DCS was in a position of trust or authority towards R or in a relationship with R that was exploitive of R or that R was in a relationship of dependency with DCS.
        R says that, when she was 16 and 17 years old, DCS would often touch her butt and would sometimes touch her breasts over her clothes.  This would occur at home and in public places, for example, while shopping.  She says that he would walk past her in a store and brush the back of his hand against her butt.  Other times he would brush the front of his body across the back of hers by passing behind her much closer than was needed.  At home he would use the palm of his hand and actually squeeze her butt.
        R described an incident occurring just before Christmas, 2019 when DCS came into her bedroom and placed his hands on her upper thighs and tugged at her pants while asking her to take her pants off and show him her “pussy” and in return he would go to the liquor store and get whatever she wanted.  She pushed him away.
        R also described incidents during which she would go into DCS’s bedroom and he would “dry hump” her.  She would lay on her back on his bed with her clothes on.  He would lie on top of her and rub his groin against hers.  She says he would take his pyjama pants off.  She wore shorts and sweatpants to make sure his penis did not touch her.
        In his statement to police, DCS acknowledges grabbing R’s bum and squeezing it if nobody was around.  He also admitted the incident where he went into her bedroom and put his hands on her pants and asked her to pull them down.  He recalled this occurred about two months before the statement.  He also admitted “dry humping” in his bed, although he says both of them kept their clothes on.  He said this occurred within the last couple of months before the statement.
        The Crown has proved elements 1, 2, and 3 beyond a reasonable doubt.  The remaining question is whether DCS was in a position of trust or authority towards R.
Law
        Consent is not a defence to a charge of sexual exploitation: R. v. C.K.K., 2020 ABCA 145.
        It is the nature of the relationship between the young person and the accused, rather than their status in relation to each other, that invokes s. 153. The age difference between them, the evolution of their relationship, and the status of the accused in relation to the young person may be relevant factors.  The Crown does not have to prove that the accused actually exploited their privileged position with respect to the young person:  R. v. Audet, 1996 CanLII 198 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 171.
        In R. v. R.T., 2017 ONSC 2625, the Court considered a case where the accused had a sexual relationship with the complainant, Z.M. At the time, he was 54 years old and she was 16. He had been in a relationship with the complainant's mother and had lived with the family for about four years. The sexual activity commenced after he moved out of the house, having split up with Z.M.’s mother.  Justice Pomerance provided the following summary of the law:
a. Position of trust: the case law
26      In Audet, La Forest J. interpreted the word “trust” in accordance with its ordinary meaning: “[c]onfidence in or reliance on some quality or attribute of a person or thing, or the truth of a statement.” An adult occupies a position of trust towards a young person where the nature of their relationship “is such that it creates an opportunity for all of the persuasive and influencing factors which adults hold over children and young persons to come into play, and the child or young person is particularly vulnerable to the sway of these factors”.
27      As with most issues, this determination is fact-specific and requires a judge to consider all of the facts relevant to the relationship in issue. These include, “[t]he age difference between the accused and the young person, the evolution of their relationship, and above all the status of the accused in relation to the young person”.
28      Some relationships will result in a presumption of trust. This may occur when there is an inherent “power dependency” and where the relationship exists because of the accused's status. For example, teacher-student relationships are presumptive trust relationships. Conversely, a relationship between a 17-year-old and the common-law spouse of her mother who shares the family home is not a presumptive trust relationship. [R. v. J. (R.H.) [1993 CarswellBC 516 (B.C. C.A.)]
29      The courts have identified various factors relevant to the identification of trust relationships. In R. v. Aird, the Ontario Court of Appeal referred to “the degree of control, influence or persuasiveness exercised by the accused over the young person” and “the expectations of the parties affected, including the accused, the young person and the young person’s parents.” In that case, Laskin J.A. affirmed the trial judge’s finding of a trust relationship between a tutor and his student, considering the young person’s naiveté and lack of sexual experience; her and her parents' trust in and reliance on the accused for his help and guidance; and the tutor-student relationship, which enabled the accused to “use his status and the persuasive and influencing factors he held in their relationship to effectively groom her into a sexual relationship.” [2013 ONCA 447, 307 O.A.C. 183 (Ont. C.A.)]
30      In R. v. E. (D.), Hill J. found a trust relationship between a young person and her second cousin, based on the nine-year age difference; the confidence and faith that the young person and her mother had in the accused that he would not harm or exploit her; the fact that the mother would not have consented to her daughter becoming involved in a sexual relationship with the accused; the young person’s immaturity; the evolution of the relationship; the fact that the accused was aware that the young person was having difficulty with her parents; he filled the role of “significant male adult figure” in the young person's life; he provided her rides, cigarettes, and alcohol; he acted as a confidant; and he established his home as an alternative to her mother’s. [ [2009] O.J. No. 1909 (Ont. S.C.J.)]
31      In R. v. Beckers, C. W. Hourigan J. relied on similar factors. The accused was 34 years older than the complainant; the complainant was vulnerable and experiencing difficulties at home; the accused exploited those difficulties by denigrating the complainant’s parents; the accused provided the complainant with a place to stay and a place where he could do things he couldn’t do at home (i.e. smoke marijuana and cigarettes); he provided the complainant with gifts and benefits, rides, and cab fare; he provided those benefits in exchange for sexual favours; he considered himself to be a mentor, big brother, father figure, and teacher to the complainant; he sexualized the complainant; and he continued his relationship with the complainant despite the requests of the parents that the relationship end. [2012 ONSC 6709 (Ont. S.C.J.)] This finding was upheld by the Court of Appeal. [R. v. B. (R.), 2014 ONCA 489 (Ont. C.A.)]
32      In R. v. Frost, the court held that the accused was in a position of trust towards the complainant who had been hired as a family helper and caretaker; who did homework, ate meals and slept over at the accused’s house; and who was essentially a part of the family unit. [2015 MBQB 96, 318 Man. R. (2d) 67 (Man. Q.B.)] In R. v. Howell, a “spiritual healer” was held to be in a position of trust towards the complainant who, along with her family, believed he could help and protect her and who followed his instructions on the belief that to refuse would bring spiritual consequences. [2012 ONSC 846 (Ont. S.C.J.)]. A “natural therapy” practitioner was found to be in a position of trust in R. v. B. (N.P.M.). [2007 BCPC 466 (B.C. Prov. Ct.)]    In other cases, circumstances have fallen short of establishing a trust relationship. For example, in R. v. Poncelet the court considered the “working student” relationship between a 15-year-old and a 40-year-old horse trainer that progressed into a sexual relationship. In that case, Smith J. highlighted the importance of considering the complainant’s vulnerability. [2008 BCSC 202 (B.C. S.C.)] The question is whether there is sufficient criteria to establish an inherent power imbalance in the relationship that caused the young person to be in a position of vulnerability and weakness. Something more than age difference must exist in order to establish a trust relationship. In that case, the court found that there was insufficient evidence of a trust relationship: the evolution of the emotional bond between the accused and the young person was intricately wound up with their mutual admiration and respect; the complainant was a mature and responsible individual; and there was no indicia of grooming or manipulation.
34      In R. v. Wright the court considered a sexual relationship between a horse rider and trainer who sold a horse to a young person and provided boarding for that horse. [2013 ONSC 3258 (Ont. S.C.J.)] The court found that there was no trust relationship: there was no evidence of grooming or of the accused providing benefits or alcohol or drugs to the young person; there was no evidence that the accused exercised any ongoing control over the young person; and the young person was mature, intelligent, independent, sophisticated, and sexually experienced. The court did not consider the complainant particularly vulnerable.
35      In R. v. Underwood, the court found that the accused was not in a position of trust towards the complainant, whom he had hired to babysit his daughters — there was no inherent power imbalance in their relationship; the complainant was not vulnerable; and there were no indicia of grooming. [2015 MBQB 66, 316 Man. R. (2d) 299 (Man. Q.B.)]  In R. v. E. (T.I.) the court found that the accused was not in a position of trust towards the complainant, despite being considered an authority on First Nations practices in the First Nations community and despite being admired and considered a role model by the complainants, as the nature of the relationship was that of friendship and nothing more. [2012 MBQB 239, 283 Man. R. (2d) 200 (Man. Q.B.)] Finally, in R. v. Caskenette the court found that evidence that the accused was the complainant's boss at an arcade and was physically bigger than the complainant was insufficient to establish the existence of a trust relationship. [1993 CarswellBC 1141 (B.C. C.A.)]
b. Summary of factors
36        On the basis of the above, the following factors are relevant to the determination of whether the accused is in a position of trust:
• The age difference between the accused and the young person — the higher the age difference, the more likely it is that the relationship is a trust relationship.
• The status of the accused — the more formal the status (teacher, father figure, big brother, mentor, etc.), the more likely it is that the relationship is a trust relationship.
• The degree of control, influence or persuasiveness exercised by the accused over the young person.
• The expectations of the parties affected, including the accused, the young person and the young person's parents.
• The vulnerability of the young person — i.e. his or her level of intelligence, sophistication, independence, and maturity and relationship with his or her parents.
• Any grooming, pressuring, or incentivising behaviour on the part of the accused — i.e. denigrating the young person's parents; engaging in sexual discussions and sexualizing the young person; and offering benefits, particularly things the young person cannot get or do at home (drugs, alcohol, etc.)
c. The duration of trust
37      How long do relationships of trust last? Authority and dependency may be situation specific. A person who has authority as a teacher may lose that authority when the student graduates from the class. A relationship of dependency may end when the adult is no longer providing for the young person. Trust is different. Trust speaks to a subjective bond between the adult and the young person. It attaches to the person, him or herself, rather than his/her position or role. Whereas authority and dependency are defined by external circumstances, trust has an internal component. It represents an emotional attachment; a faith that the adult would not act contrary to the child's interests. As it was put by Blair J. in R. v. S. (P.),
I take a “position of trust” to be somewhat different than a “position of authority”. The latter invokes notions of power and the ability to hold in one's hands the future or destiny of the person who is the object of the exercise of the authority: see, R. v. Kyle (1991), 1991 CanLII 11758 (ON CA), 68 C.C.C. (3d) 286 (Ont. C.A.). A position of trust may, but need not necessarily, incorporate those characteristics. It is founded on notions of safety and confidence and reliability that the special nature of the relationship will not be breached. [[1993] O.J. No. 704 (Ont. Gen. Div.)]
38      The nature of trust suggests that it may have a certain persistence. Because it attaches to the person, rather than the relationship, it may continue even after the terms of the relationship have changed. This is a determination to be made on a case-by-case basis. 
 
Application to this case
        The most compelling evidence that DCS was in a position of trust towards R is that her mother left her alone with DCS from the time she was 11 years old and relied on DCS to act as a parent towards R.
        In his statement to police, DCS acknowledged that R referred to him as her stepdad when describing him to friends.  He also stated that R confided in him regarding personal issues such as her relationship with her boyfriend.  DCS states that he counseled R to stay in school and tried to be a positive influence in her life and further states that he took care of her and cared for her.
        R told police, in her statement, that DCS was like a dad to her.  She testified that she described him to her friends as her stepdad.
        I note the age difference between DCS and R was substantial. DCS acted as and recognized himself as her stepfather.  He had a significant degree of control, influence or persuasiveness over R.  The expectations of the parties affected, including DCS, R and R’s mother strongly indicate a position of trust.
        The vulnerability of R - her level of intelligence, sophistication, independence, maturity, and relationship with her mother all support a finding of a trust relationship. The evidence clearly shows acts by DCS of grooming, pressuring, or incentivising behaviour.  He acknowledged engaging in sexual discussions and sexualizing R, as well as offering her benefits (particularly things R could not obtain on her own) such as cigarettes, alcohol and drugs.
        I find that the evidence establishes beyond a reasonable doubt that DCS was in a position trust towards R.  
        The Crown has proved all of the essential elements of s. 153(1)(a) of the Criminal Code.  I find DCS guilty on Count 4.
Count 1
        For DCS to be found guilty of sexual assault, the Crown must prove each of these essential elements beyond a reasonable doubt:
1.      DCS intentionally applied force to R;
2.      That R did not consent to the force DCS applied;
3.      That DCS knew that R did not consent to the force that he intentionally applied;
4.      That the force that DCS intentionally applied took place in circumstances of a sexual nature.
        The Crown alleges that the events giving rise to this charge span the time both prior to and after R turned 16 years old.  With regard to those events that occurred prior to R turning 16 years old, consent is not an element of the offence pursuant to s. 150.1 of the Criminal Code.
        With regard to the events that occurred after R turned 16, the issue of consent is vitiated by my finding that DCS induced R to engage in the activities by abusing a position of trust pursuant to s. 273.1(2)(c) of the Code for the reasons expressed above under my analysis of Count 4.
        My findings regarding the event of sexual touching at the Ramada Hotel, when R was 11 years old, which grounded finding DCS guilty of Count 2 also satisfies all of the elements of the offence under s. 271.
        The occasions that DCS intentionally grabbed R’s butt and squeezed, as previously described, have also been proved by the Crown beyond a reasonable doubt to meet all of the elements of s. 271. 
        The occasion when DCS went into R’s room and grabbed her pants and asked her to pull them down to show him her “pussy” has been proved beyond a reasonable doubt to satisfy all the elements of s. 271.
        The acts of “dry humping” previously described have been proved by the Crown beyond a reasonable doubt to satisfy all of the elements of s. 271.
        I am further satisfied that the events acknowledged by DCS of R masturbating him in his car and in his bedroom have been proved by the Crown beyond a reasonable doubt to satisfy all of the elements of s. 271.
        I find DCS guilty of Count 1.
        In summary, I find DCS guilty of Counts 1, 2 and 4, and not guilty of Count 3 of the Indictment.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/pe/sc/2023pesc4.html
        
Taylor Edward Cooke (“Cooke”) is charged that he operated a conveyance on August 6, 2020 in a manner that was dangerous to the public and, as a result, caused bodily harm to Ryan MacKinnon (“MacKinnon”) contrary to ss. 320.13(2) and 320.2(a) of the Criminal Code of Canada, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 [Criminal Code]. II.      BACKGROUND
        
Main Street in O’Leary, Prince Edward Island, is a straight, two-lane street divided by a solid yellow line. Traffic travels eastbound and westbound. Each lane is marked on the right-hand side by a white fog line. A sidewalk and streetlights run along the eastbound lane. And the street is lined with businesses, residences, parking lots, driveways, and other connecting streets. 
        
On August 6, 2020, Cooke was operating a motorcycle on Main Street. He was travelling in the westbound lane. It was after 11:00 p.m. Cooke observed the taillights of a vehicle ahead of him in the westbound lane. The vehicle eventually pulled over to the right-hand side of the street and stopped. The vehicle straddled the fog line in the westbound lane. MacKinnon and a friend were crossing the street in front of the stopped vehicle to get to the sidewalk. MacKinnon was struck by the motorcycle while it was overtaking the stopped vehicle and seriously injured. Cooke was later charged. III.     LAW 1.      Presumption and burden of proof
        
Cooke is presumed innocent of the offence. The burden of displacing that presumption rests with the Crown. It never shifts to the accused. In other words, Cooke has no obligation to prove anything. The Crown alone must prove the elements of the offence beyond a reasonable doubt. 
 
2.      Elements of the offence
        a)      Physical
        
The physical elements of the offence require the operation of a conveyance by an accused in a manner that is dangerous to the public having regard to all of the circumstances, including the nature, condition and use of the place where the conveyance is being operated and the amount of traffic which at the time is, or might reasonably be expected to be, at that place (R. v. Beatty, 2008 SCC 5 at para. 43; and R. v. Roy, 2012 SCC 26 at para. 28). There is no single exhaustive list of relevant factors. The question is whether the driving, when viewed objectively, is dangerous to the public in all the circumstances (Roy at para. 34). The focus must be the manner of driving – not its consequences (Roy at paras. 34 and 35; and Beatty at para. 46). A consequence, such as a collision or injury, has no bearing on whether the manner of driving in question is dangerous (Beatty at para. 46). It is the risk created by the driving that is relevant (Roy at para. 34). All of this requires a meaningful inquiry into the manner of driving (Roy at para. 35).
        b)     Mental
        
The mental element of the offence requires the conduct of an accused to be a marked departure from the standard of care that a reasonable person would have exercised in the same circumstances (R. v. Chung, 2020 SCC 8 at para. 14; Beatty at para. 43; and Roy at paras. 28 and 36). This modified objective standard means that a reasonable person is placed in the circumstances or position of the accused (Roy at para. 38). The conduct of the accused is compared to the conduct of a reasonable person (Chung at paras. 16, 24, and 27). This involves considering what a reasonable person would have foreseen and done in the same circumstances (Chung at paras. 16, 17, 23, 25, and 26). All of the circumstances – the full picture of what occurred – must be considered (Chung at paras. 24 and 27; Beatty at para. 43; and Roy at para. 39).
        
An analysis of fault in this context may benefit from asking two questions. First, whether a reasonable person, in light of all the relevant evidence, would have foreseen the risk and taken steps to avoid it if possible. Second, if so, whether the failure of the accused to foresee the risk and take steps to avoid it, if possible, was a marked departure from the standard of care expected of a reasonable person in the circumstances of the accused (Roy at para. 36; and Chung at paras. 14 and 24). These questions serve as a helpful reminder of the need to compare the conduct of the accused and the conduct of a reasonable person in the same circumstances. This is essential in order to determine whether the mental element of the offence is present (Chung at para. 24).
        
The presence of this fault requirement is critically important. Care must be taken to avoid extending the reach of criminal law to conduct that is not morally blameworthy. Carelessness or a mere departure in care while driving may support civil liability. A marked departure is necessary, however, in order to sustain criminal liability (Roy at paras. 30 and 37). While a matter of degree, the lack of care must be sufficiently serious to merit criminal punishment (Roy at para. 28; and Beatty at paras. 35 and 48). In other words, moral blameworthiness is present only when there is a marked departure from the care that a reasonable person would observe in all the circumstances (Beatty at para. 36).
        c)      Bodily harm
        
Bodily harm is defined in s. 2 of the Criminal Code to mean any hurt or injury to a person that interferes with the health or comfort of the person and is more than merely transient or trifling in nature. 
        d)     Causation
      The aggravating element of the offence – bodily harm – requires proof of causation. The dangerous operation of the conveyance must be a significant contributing cause, or a contributing cause outside the de minimis range, of the bodily harm. The two phrases – “significant contributing cause” and “contributing cause outside the de minimis range” – are synonymous (R. v. Nette, 2001 SCC 78 at paras. 71-72). The conduct of the accused need not, however, be the sole or predominant contributing cause of the bodily harm. It need only be a contributing cause that is significant or beyond the de minimis range (R. v. Maybin, 2012 SCC 24 at para. 14). Determining causation therefore involves both factual and legal inquiries (R v. Kippax, 2011 ONCA 766 at paras. 21-28). 
      Factual causation is an inquiry into how the victim suffered bodily harm in a medical, mechanical or physical sense and the contribution of the accused to that result (Nette at para. 44). The question is generally whether, “but for” the conduct of the accused, the bodily harm would have occurred (Maybin at para. 15). This factual determination has nothing to do with intention, foresight, or risk (Smithers v. R., 1977 CanLII 7 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 506 at p. 518). It is rooted in the facts of the case. Legal causation, on the other hand, questions whether the accused should be held responsible in law for the bodily harm (Nette at para. 45). It is grounded in legal considerations, including the fundamental principle that an individual without moral blameworthiness should not be punished by the criminal law (Nette at para. 45). In effect, legal causation is a narrowing concept which examines a wide range of factual causes and reduces them to causes which are sufficiently close or connected to the harm to warrant legal responsibility (Maybin at para. 16). Causation is therefore a determination grounded in the specific factual and legal context of each case (Maybin at para. 17).
      Contributory negligence is not recognized in criminal law (Nette at para. 49). Causation, as a requisite aggravating element of the offence, is focused on the conduct of the accused. However, other circumstances in the record may prevent a finding of causation and raise a reasonable doubt. For example, evidence showing that an accident or collision was unavoidable irrespective of the conduct of an accused would prevent a finding of factual causation (R. v. Alli, 2012 ONCJ 49 at para. 70). Similarly, an intervening act may be of such a nature that legal causation cannot be established (Maybin at para. 60). These concepts or considerations, when relevant, do not change the test for causation. The required standard remains unchanged: the dangerous conduct of the accused must still be a significant contributing cause of the bodily harm (Maybin at paras. 28 and 60). 3.      Proof beyond a reasonable doubt
      The standard of proof required of the Crown – proof beyond a reasonable doubt – is a high one. It falls close to certainty, although absolute certainty is not necessary. A finding grounded in probability, however, is not enough (R. v. Lifchus, 1997 CanLII 319 (SCC), 3 S.C.R. 320 at para. 36). Proof beyond a reasonable doubt falls in between, but it rests much closer to certainty than mere probability (R. v. Starr, 2000 SCC 40 at para. 242). A reasonable doubt is not imaginary or frivolous (Lifchus at para. 36). It does not rest on speculation or guesswork. It is not based on sympathy or prejudice (Lifchus at para. 36). Rather, a reasonable doubt is rooted in reason and common sense. It is connected by logic to the evidence at trial (Lifchus at para. 36). In the end, it is the presence or absence of evidence which determines whether the Crown has discharged its burden or whether a reasonable doubt remains. In short, the standard required of the Crown is an exacting one. 4.      Evidence in defence to the offence
      Evidence presented in defence to an offence requires consideration of the relationship between reasonable doubt and credibility (R. v. W. (D.), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 742). This is not a matter of deciding whether to believe the evidence of the Crown or the evidence presented by the defence. This type of either/or inquiry excludes the real and legitimate possibility that the whole of the evidence – both Crown and defence – may leave the court with a reasonable doubt. The court must remain mindful of whether, based on all of the evidence, including the evidence presented by and on behalf of the accused, it is left with a reasonable doubt.
      The lines of inquiry used to describe this relationship are not sacrosanct (R. v. S. (W.D.), 1994 CanLII 76 (SCC), 3 S.C.R. 521 at p. 533; R. v. Dinardo, 2008 SCC 24 at para. 23; and R. v. S. (J.H.), 2008 SCC 30 at para. 13). Context matters. In cases of dangerous driving, where objective elements are present, two inquiries are helpful: a)           
first, if the evidence of the accused is accepted and, based on that evidence, there is a reasonable doubt about whether the Crown has proven any one of the elements required for dangerous driving, then the accused must be found not guilty; and b)           
second, even if the evidence of the accused is not accepted, where, after considering that evidence by itself or together with the other evidence, there is a reasonable doubt whether the Crown has proven any one of the elements required for dangerous driving, then the accused must be found not guilty (R. v. Ibrahim, 2019 ONCA 631 at para. 63). These inquiries serve as an important reminder that the evidence presented by and on behalf of an accused is relevant to whether the Crown has proven each of the elements of dangerous driving beyond a reasonable doubt (Ibrahim at para. 61). Evidence about the state of mind of the accused, and any explanations offered by the accused, must be considered as part of all the evidence in these types of cases (Roy at para. 39; and Beatty at paras. 8, 43, 47, and 49). IV.     EVIDENCE
      Mindful of the direction that reasons are not required to refer to every finding or piece of evidence (R. v. R.E.M., 2008 SCC 51 at paras. 18 and 20; and R. v. H.S.B., 2008 SCC 52 at para. 8), the evidence presented by the parties – and accepted by the court – is summarized briefly. 1.      Admissions
      Certain admissions were made by the accused and filed pursuant to s. 655 of the Criminal Code (R. v Brookfield Gardens Inc., 2018 PECA 2 at para. 24). Cooke admitted that he was the driver of the motorcycle involved in the collision on Main Street on August 6, 2020 (Admission 1). Cooke also admitted that MacKinnon was the pedestrian struck in the collision (Admission 2). 2.      Evidence of the Crown
      Three friends who were in the company of MacKinnon before, and at the time of, the collision testified at trial. They had attended a local fitness gym on Main Street before leaving around 11:00 p.m. Two girls were in a vehicle and travelled westbound on Main Street. The two boys, which included MacKinnon, were jogging in front of the vehicle as a bit of a joke. It was a clear night. There was no traffic. The road surface was dry. Main Street was lit with streetlights. After passing the local gas station, the two boys decided that they would cross the street to the sidewalk and run home. The vehicle pulled over to the right side of the westbound lane and stopped. The vehicle straddled the fog line. The girls remained inside. MacKinnon walked back to the passenger-side window of the vehicle and passed his bag to one of the girls. MacKinnon turned back and walked in front of the vehicle. The two boys proceeded to cross the street to get to the sidewalk running along the eastbound lane of Main Street.
      MacKinnon was struck by a motorcycle as he crossed the street. The three friends described the collision as happening in a flash or split second. MacKinnon was seriously injured.
      There was no material challenge to this evidence. Given the very short period of time available for the three friends to observe the motorcycle, they were unable to offer any material evidence about its speed or manner of operation. In the circumstances, this was reasonable and absolutely no fault of the three friends.
      The Crown also called three residents of Main Street. One resident was out for a drive and travelling eastbound on the street when she encountered the collision. A second resident was in her home when she heard a motorcycle “wide open” and travelling westbound shortly before the collision. A third resident was also in his home when he saw a flash of light passing by his window shortly before the collision. He also testified that there were approximately thirty driveways and laneways connecting to Main Street.
      A woman sitting in her vehicle at the local coffee shop also testified that she observed a motorcycle travelling westbound on Route 142 at a very high speed and passing a pickup truck shortly before 11:00 p.m. A short time later, the woman also observed an ambulance travelling westbound. She left the coffee shop and returned home. The woman travelled westbound onto Main Street before she was directed around the location of the collision. When she was directed back to Main Street after the scene, she stopped and observed a motorcycle being loaded onto a truck. The woman stated on cross-examination that the motorcycle was similar to the one she had observed earlier travelling westbound on Route 142.
      This circumstantial evidence related to a motorcycle travelling westbound on Route 142 and Main Street was of limited value to the court. These witnesses were not in positions to provide more reliable evidence about the speed or operation of the particular motorcycle of the accused. However, the evidence was helpful in two more limited ways. First, it confirmed that Main Street was a street that also included private residences. Second, it confirmed that there was at least some traffic on Main Street at the relevant time.
      The doctor who treated the accused in the emergency department after the collision testified that, when obtaining a history from the accused about what happened, the accused stated that he was driving about 100 km/h when the collision occurred. According to the doctor, the accused was alert at the time and oriented as to time and place. This admission was not challenged in any material way on cross-examination.
      The Crown also tendered video evidence taken from several surveillance cameras facing Main Street. The videos capture activity on the street before and after the collision between the motorcycle and MacKinnon. Upon review, only the collision itself was missing from the video evidence. The evidence was nevertheless helpful to observe the vehicle and the motorcycle, and to confirm the amount of traffic that was actually at the place of the collision at the relevant time. Vehicles were present on Main Street in the minutes before the collision on August 6, 2020. 3.      Evidence of the accused
      The accused testified that the posted speed limits changed from 80 km/h to 60 km/h and then to 50 km/h as he travelled westbound on Route 142 and later Main Street. He did not recall looking at his speedometer at any point. The accused did not see any vehicles on the road until he observed the taillights of a vehicle travelling ahead of him in the westbound lane. He made this observation before passing by the local gas station. The accused later saw the vehicle slowing down and then stopping on the right-hand side of Main Street. He testified that he was focusing on the vehicle and did not see anything around the vehicle. The accused went to pull around the vehicle, saw two people in his peripheral vision, and then felt an instantaneous impact on the left side of his motorcycle. According to the accused, there had been no sign of anyone and he had no time to react to anything. The vehicle was just stopped on the side of the street. After the collision, the accused stated that he did not apply the brakes. The motorcycle coasted down Main Street before eventually coming to rest. It was leaking fluid.
      On cross-examination, the accused testified that he had no memory of any speed while operating the motorcycle on Route 142 and later Main Street. He said that he would have slowed down moving from the 80 km/h zone to the 60 km/h zone, but that his speed would not have been much different between the 60 km/h zone and the 50 km/h zone. In the words of the accused, he was not sure what speed he was travelling at the time. The accused did acknowledge that he noticed a vehicle travelling in the westbound lane ahead of him. He did not, however, adjust his speed at the time. The accused said that he was very surprised by the calculations that the motorcycle was travelling more than 100 km/h as it passed by the local gas station in the 50 km/h zone. According to the accused, he was “coasting along” as he passed the gas station. He stated that he was not accelerating, had let off the throttle, and was slowing down. The collision occurred a few seconds after he passed the gas station. The impact was described as instantaneous.
      The evidence of the accused was consistent with the video surveillance of the motorcycle as it passed by the local gas station on Main Street. At no point during the video does the brake light of the motorcycle illuminate. 4.      Expert evidence
      The Crown called evidence from two experts from the RCMP. They were qualified by the court without challenge from the defence. The reports from those experts were also admitted into the record with the consent of the defence. 
      Cst. Stevenson prepared a collision reconstruction report. Cst. Stevenson concluded that the motorcycle collided with the pedestrian one metre to the left of the centre line on Main Street in the eastbound lane. The operator of the motorcycle was travelling west. There was no physical evidence of braking on the road surface.
      Cst. Sanders prepared a speed analysis report. Cst. Sanders concluded that the motorcycle was travelling at a minimum average speed of 133 km/h when it passed by a video surveillance camera on the exterior of the gas station on Main Street on August 6, 2020. Cst. Sanders later performed the same calculations using the same video surveillance camera and a control vehicle passing by the same location on August 19, 2021. His opinion regarding the minimum average speed of the motorcycle – 133 km/h – shortly before the collision was unchanged. Cst. Sanders also prepared a video comparison report, together with a comparison video, using the surveillance video of the motorcycle on August 6, 2020 and the surveillance video of the control vehicle on August 19, 2021. This video was created to allow for the comparison of their speeds based on perception.
      This expert evidence was not challenged in any material way. While the defence emphasized that the speed calculation performed by Cst. Sanders was only an average, the methodology used to calculate that speed was not seriously contested. This is perhaps not surprising because its own expert used the same methodology to perform speed calculations on behalf of the defence – albeit for three intervals as opposed to the single interval calculated by the RCMP. The defence also challenged the precise area of impact determined by Cst. Stevenson and suggested, with some support from its own expert, that this area may in fact have been different. The court accepted the area of impact determined by Cst. Stevenson for at least three reasons. First, Cst. Stevenson was present on scene following the collision. Second, the expert retained by the defence did not provide an opinion on this point to the contrary but suggested only that the area of impact may have been different. Third, the defence expert used the area of impact determined by Cst. Stevenson for the purpose of his calculations and report.
      The defence called evidence from one expert. He was qualified by the court without challenge from the Crown. The report from that expert was admitted into the record with the consent of the Crown.
      Mike Reade, a forensic collision reconstructionist, prepared a report using the videos and measurements collected by the RCMP. Mr. Reade concluded that he was 95% confident that the motorcycle was travelling between 148 km/h and 111 km/h when it exited the view of the video surveillance camera on the exterior of the gas station on Main Street on August 6, 2020 (Exhibit D-2 at p. 20). At this point, according to Mr. Reade, the motorcycle was 32.85 metres (107.7 feet) from the area of impact identified by Cst. Stevenson (Exhibit D-2 at p. 20). This conclusion was not challenged in any material way.
      However, in his report, Mr. Reade also presented a number of statistical analyses based on multiple variables. Very little weight has been assigned to these statistical analyses. As Mr. Reade explained in his testimony, the nature of statistical analysis meant that a range of outcomes could be generated with 95% confidence; however, he was unable to say which particular outcome in that range is correct or true. Many of the variables used in the statistical analyses were also without foundation in the evidence of this particular collision. This lack of connectedness to the actual evidence in this case, when coupled with the limitations inherent in statistical analyses, meant that the court assigned very little weight to the statistical analyses performed by Mr. Reade.
      For example, following the statistical analysis for the react and stop scenario, Mr. Reade concluded that the average speed for a motorcycle to stop within the stopping distance range, and avoid a collision, was 50 km/h. The fastest speed where a collision could still occur was 77 km/h. The slowest speed was 33 km/h (Exhibit D-2 at pp. 19 and 20). These particular conclusions have no weight because the statistical analysis introduced a number of variables which had no foundation in the evidence. For example, the analysis introduced a stopping distance range (+/- 3 metres) when other calculations recognized that the stopping distance was 32.85 metres. That distance was based on the area of impact identified by Cst. Stevenson. Similarly, the analysis introduced a perception and reaction time of 2.0 seconds. However, according to Mr. Reade, that perception and reaction time reflected a situation where the unexpected object was motionless in dark clothing and there was no ambient lighting. Those were not the circumstances present in this case. As a final example, the analysis introduced stopping frictions of 0.4 and 0.95. However, according to Mr. Reade, the former is used to reflect moderate braking while the latter is used to reflect emergency or lock-up braking. Again, neither circumstance was present in this case.
      When the expert evidence is considered together with the admission by the accused upon arrival at the emergency department, the court finds that the accused was travelling 111 km/h when he passed the gas station on Main Street and was 32.85 metres (107.7 feet) from the area of impact. While the precise speed at the time of the collision is not known, the court accepts the admission made by the accused that he was travelling about 100 km/h when the collision occurred. These findings resolve the disagreement about the speed of the motorcycle in a manner which extends the benefit to the accused. 
V.      ARGUMENT
      Mindful of the direction that reasons are not required to refer to every argument presented by counsel (R.E.M. at para. 32; H.S.B. at para. 8; and Dinardo at para. 30), the main arguments by the parties are summarized briefly. 1.      Crown
      The Crown submitted that all the required elements of dangerous driving causing bodily harm had been proven beyond a reasonable doubt. According to the Crown, this was not an unavoidable accident. In support of its position that the manner of driving was dangerous to the public, the Crown relied on, among other things, the speed of the motorcycle, the presence of traffic on the street, the existence of residences and businesses on the street, and the number of entry points onto the street, including driveways, parking lots and other streets. In support of its position that the conduct of the accused was a marked departure from the standard of care that a reasonable person would have exercised in the same circumstances, the Crown pointed to, among other things, the observation of the vehicle ahead and then later stopped on the side of the street, the failure of the accused to look at his speedometer, the posted speed limit, the speed of the motorcycle, and the absence of evidence of braking. While the Crown did not contest that the accused was slowing down by going off the throttle, in the words of the Crown, the accused was still travelling at an “excessive” rate of speed when overtaking a stopped vehicle. As for the requisite elements of causation and bodily harm, the Crown argued that the uncontested facts and medical evidence spoke for itself.
 
2.      Defence
      The defence submitted that the offence of dangerous driving causing bodily harm had not been proven by the Crown. Two main arguments were advanced. First, the defence argued that the physical and mental elements of the offence were not established on the facts. According to the defence, there was a brief period of high speed before the motorcycle was slowing to an unknown speed at the time of the collision. The street was straight, the road surface was dry, traffic was very light, and it was after 11:00 p.m. The businesses on the street were closed. While the defence did not deny that the accused was not looking at his speedometer, the defence emphasized that the exact speed of the motorcycle at the time of the collision is still unknown. When all of the evidence is considered, the defence argued that the criminal standard for liability was not reached by the Crown. Second, the defence argued that evidence related to causation left a reasonable doubt. According to the defence, the evidence suggested that the accident was unavoidable. In other words, the circumstances were such that a collision could not have been avoided – regardless of the speed of the motorcycle. Among other things, the pedestrian was obstructed by the stopped vehicle, the pedestrian was wearing dark clothing, and the pedestrian was running out too close to the motorcycle. The defence argued that all of these circumstances, which occurred in just a few seconds, left a reasonable doubt as to whether the conduct of the accused caused the bodily harm in evidence. VI.     APPLICATION 1.      Dangerous to the public
      In order to satisfy the physical element of the offence, the manner of driving, when viewed objectively, must be dangerous to the public having regard to all the circumstances. The accused was operating a motorcycle after 11:00 p.m. on a main street in a rural municipality that was lined with businesses, residences, parking lots, driveways, and other connecting streets. The two lanes of the street were divided by a solid yellow line. Streetlights provided ambient light, and it was a clear night. The posted speed limit was 50 km/h. The location was preceded by a 60 km/h zone and an 80 km/h zone. Some traffic was present on the street, but it was light.
      The accused did not check his speedometer, did not adjust his speed when he entered the 50 km/h zone, did not adjust his speed when he observed the taillights of the vehicle travelling ahead of him in the same lane, was travelling more than 100 km/h in the seconds before the collision, and did not apply his brakes as he observed the vehicle stop on the right-hand side of street straddling the fog line. The accused let off the throttle and pulled out to overtake the vehicle. He was travelling about 100 km/h at the time of the collision.
      The court is satisfied, after reviewing all of the circumstances, that the driving of the accused was objectively dangerous to the public. Travelling more than 100 km/h on a main street in a rural municipality, where there the posted speed limit is 50 km/h, results in a real risk to the public. And, in a place like the one present in this case, that risk extends to other drivers, passengers, and pedestrians. While the exact speed of the motorcycle at the time of the collision cannot be precisely known, that does not prevent a finding that the physical element of the offence is present (R. v. Pyrek, 2017 ONCA 476 at paras. 38-39). The accused was not, as he suggested, just coasting along Main Street. He was exceeding the posted limit by a significant amount. Excessive speed in this context was dangerous to the public. 2.      Marked departure
      In order to satisfy the mental element of the offence, the conduct of an accused must be a marked departure from the standard of care that a reasonable person would have exercised in the same circumstances. 
      A reasonable person in these circumstances would have foreseen the risk of a collision (Chung at paras. 14 and 23). The risk of a person entering the street was also reasonably foreseeable in the circumstances. This was a main road lined with businesses, residences, parking lots, and driveways. Travelling along a main road at a speed that significantly exceeds the posted speed limit, after observing a vehicle ahead in the same lane and after observing that vehicle pull over to the right-hand side of the road and stop, is not comparable to the momentary mistakes that may be made by any reasonable driver, such as the mistimed turn taken in Roy or the rapid loss of awareness in Beatty. The excessive speed present in this case was not a momentary lapse in attention or judgment resulting from the “automatic and reflexive nature of driving” (Beatty at para. 34) or “[s]imple carelessness, to which even the most prudent drivers may occasionally succumb” (Roy at para. 37). A reasonable person would have foreseen that travelling at such an excessive speed along a main street in a rural municipality creates a very real risk of a collision occurring within seconds (Chung at para. 22). And that could reasonably be a collision with a vehicle or pedestrian in these circumstances.
      A reasonable person in these circumstances would have taken steps to avoid that risk (Chung at para. 24). A reasonable person would have adjusted their speed when entering the 50 km/h zone. A reasonable person would been travelling at or near the posted speed limit. A reasonable person would have been checking their speedometer. A reasonable person would have observed the vehicle travelling ahead in the same lane and adjusted their speed. A reasonable person would have recognized the hazard presented by the vehicle slowing and stopping on the right-hand side of the road, including the risk that individuals may be inside, outside, or exiting the vehicle. A reasonable person would have braked and not just let off the throttle. 
      The accused was travelling on the main street in a rural municipality at a speed that significantly exceeded the posted speed limit. He was travelling through the heart of O’Leary. The accused did not check his speedometer. He did not adjust his speed when the posted speed limit changed. He did not adjust his speed when he observed the vehicle ahead of him. In fact, the accused was travelling at an excessive speed after becoming aware that there was a vehicle ahead of him in the same lane. As the accused approached the vehicle, it slowed and then stopped on the side of the road. The accused did not brake. Instead, he let off the throttle.
      The court is satisfied, after reviewing all of the evidence, that the failure of the accused to foresee the risk of a collision, and take steps to avoid it, was a marked departure from the standard of care expected of a reasonable person in the circumstances (Chung at paras. 23 and 24). When compared to what a reasonable person would have foreseen and done in the circumstances, the conduct of the accused constitutes a marked departure from the norm (Chung at para. 29). 
3.      Bodily harm
      Bodily harm means any hurt or injury to a person that interferes with the health or comfort of the person and is more than merely transient or trifling in nature. MacKinnon suffered serious injuries in the collision (Exhibit C-10). His left leg was severed below the knee. He had multiple open fractures and soft tissue injuries in his lower right leg. His pelvis was fractured. And he suffered a significant laceration.
      The court is satisfied that the injuries suffered by MacKinnon constitute bodily harm. 4.      Causation
      In order to satisfy the aggravating element of the offence, causation must also be proven. The dangerous operation of the motorcycle must be a significant contributing cause of the bodily harm. After reviewing all of the evidence, the court is satisfied that, but for the dangerous operation of the motorcycle by the accused, the bodily harm suffered by MacKinnon would not have occurred. This was not, as the defence suggested, an unavoidable accident. This collision with a pedestrian crossing Main Street was a materialization of the danger created by the accused when he operated his motorcycle in the manner that he did. 
      The accused observed the change in the posted speed limit to 50 km/h but did not adjust his speed. He observed the taillights of a vehicle ahead of him but did not adjust his speed. The accused did not look at his speedometer. He was travelling more than twice the posted speed limit in the seconds before the collision. The accused observed the vehicle ahead of him slow down, pull over to the right-hand side of the westbound lane, and stop. The accused let off the throttle. There was no physical evidence of braking at the scene. At the time of the collision with MacKinnon, the accused was traveling about 100 km/h. Even the accused acknowledged, after watching the video surveillance from August 6, 2020 and hearing the evidence of the experts from the RCMP, that he was “surprised” by the calculated speed of the motorcycle. Causation has been proven in these circumstances.
      In support of its position on causation, the defence provided a number of cases for consideration by the court. 
      For example, the defence relied on R. v. Brogan, 2008 NSPC 42, to support the proposition that, when circumstances occur unexpectedly so that a driver – no matter how careful – cannot avoid the consequences, the accident is unavoidable. In those situations, a reasonable doubt is raised in relation to causation (Brogan at para. 117). However, in Brogan, there was no evidence that the accused was exceeding the speed limit (Brogan at para. 137) and no hazard or danger was presented to the accused in that case (Brogan at para. 139). This is contrasted with this case where the accused was travelling at an excessive speed – even after he observed the vehicle ahead of him in the westbound lane. The accused in this case was also presented with a hazard or danger on the road: he observed the vehicle slow and stop on the right side of Main Street. A reasonable person in the circumstances would have foreseen the risks presented by this hazard or danger and taken steps to avoid it.
      The defence also relied on R. v. Hall, 2004 CanLII 41168 (ONSC), in an effort to contrast the circumstances of that case with the evidence in this case. In that case, the view of the pedestrians was unobstructed and they were plainly visible to the oncoming vehicle. It was not a situation where the pedestrians “suddenly ran out in front of a motorist who did not have time to stop” (Hall at para. 73). Similarly, in this case, the accused had an unobstructed view of the vehicle that he observed slow down, pull over, and stop on the side of the street straddling the fog line. The street was illuminated with streetlights, and the two boys crossed the street in front of the running vehicle. While the accused testified that he had no time to react to anything, that risk was one created by the excessive speed being travelled by the accused.
      The defence distinguished the decision in R. v. Malkowski, 2015 ONCA 887, where it was argued – unsuccessfully – that the collision would have likely occurred in any event regardless of the speed of the accused. In that case, the accused was travelling 152 km/h in a zone with a posted speed limit of 50 km/h. A child was struck while running across the road. The Ontario Court of Appeal did not accept this submission because it ignored the fact that the accused “would not have been in the position he was in on [the road] when the victim started across the road had he not been driving at the speed he was travelling” (Malkowski at para. 23). According to the defence, this reasoning casts too wide of a net for criminal liability and is inconsistent with the decisions in Brogan and Hall. The court does not share that view.
      The dangerous driving of the accused was a significant contributing cause of the bodily harm suffered by MacKinnon. In these circumstances, it cannot be concluded by the court that the accused is without moral blameworthiness and should not be held responsible by the criminal law for his conduct. 5.      Evidence in defence to the offence and as a whole
      After weighing all of the evidence, including the evidence presented by and on behalf of the accused, the court is not left with a reasonable doubt. While the evidence of the accused was accepted on a number of points, the Crown has proven the required elements of the offence beyond a reasonable doubt (Ibrahim at paras. 61 and 63). In his evidence, the accused made a number of statements which actually supported the conclusion that the operation of the motorcycle was objectively dangerous to the public and that the manner of driving by the accused constituted a marked departure from the standard of care that a reasonable person would have exercised in the same circumstances. This explanatory evidence of the accused was considered as part of all the evidence before the court in order to determine whether the Crown had proven the offence beyond a reasonable doubt (Roy at para. 39; and Beatty at paras. 8, 43, 47, and 49). VII.    CONCLUSION
      For these reasons, the court is satisfied, upon considering the evidence as a whole, that the Crown has proven the elements of the offence – physical, mental, and aggravating – beyond a reasonable doubt. The accused is convicted of the offence contrary to ss. 320.13(2) and 320.2(a) of the Criminal Code.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/nl/sc/2023nlsc6.html
           
The Accused is charged with sexual exploitation arising out a single incident that is alleged to have occurred between March 1, 2018 and June 30, 2018.
           
At the time of the alleged offence the Complainant would have been 16 years of age, perhaps almost 17 years of age. He is now 21 years of age.
           
The Complainant has provided an affidavit in support of his Application to tender his evidence to the Court remotely by means of closed circuit television (“CCTV”). The Application is made pursuant to section 486.2(2) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 which states as follows: Despite section 650, in any proceedings against an accused, the judge or justice may, on application of the prosecutor in respect of a witness, or on application of a witness, order that the witness testify outside the court room or behind a screen or other device that would allow the witness not to see the accused if the judge or justice is of the opinion that the order would facilitate the giving of a full and candid account by the witness of the acts complained of or would otherwise be in the interest of the proper administration of justice.
           
In his affidavit the Complainant says that he will not be able to give evidence if he has to be in the same courtroom as the Accused. He says that the matter has been ongoing for over three years and has been causing him a lot of stress and anxiety. He says that the prospect of giving evidence in an open courtroom with the Accused, judge, counsel and members of the public causes him a lot of stress.
           
The Complainant deposes that his preference is to give evidence from another room in the Courthouse via CCTV. He feels that he would be able to give evidence from another room in the Courthouse. I understood Crown counsel to say during the course of her submissions that if the Complainant’s Application is dismissed, he will not be giving evidence at all.
           
I inquired whether Crown counsel wished to have the Complainant testify for the purposes of the Application. CCTV was available in the courtroom for that purpose. Crown counsel was prepared to have the Complainant made available for the purposes of cross-examination later in the day, but was satisfied to proceed on the basis of the affidavit that had been submitted. Defence counsel did not wish to cross-examine the Complainant, and was prepared to proceed without further testimony being adduced.
           
In R. v. Hoyles, 2018 NLCA 46, Hoegg J.A. stated at paragraph 11 that evidence is not always required to support an application under sections 486.1(2) or 486.2(2) of the Criminal Code. She qualified that remark later at the same paragraph when she said: This is not to say that formal evidence is never necessary, or that it is not a good idea. …
           
Despite the fact that I have not heard from the Complainant directly, I believe that I have sufficient information to give a decision. I have decided that the Complainant’s Application must be dismissed. The following are my reasons for doing so. analysis
           
Section 486.1(3) of the Criminal Code sets out the factors that I must consider in deciding whether or not to make an order allowing for testimonial aids such as giving evidence remotely by CCTV.
       
I will deal with each in turn based upon the information that I have at hand. The Age Of The Witness
       
The Complainant is 21 years of age. At the time of the alleged offence he was well over 16 years of age, perhaps almost 17 years of age.
       
Crown counsel characterized the Complainant as a young person and argued, that on account of his age, accommodations ought to be made for him. 
       
I don’t agree. The Complainant has finished high school. The Complainant is old enough to vote. He is old enough to drink alcoholic beverages legally. He is old enough to join a police force or serve in the armed forces. 
       
I do not view the Complainant’s age as being a determinative factor in arriving at my ultimate conclusion. If he had just turned 18 years of age I might be more inclined to give this factor more weight. But a 21-year old person should not expect, on the basis of age alone, to qualify for the accommodations that are sought in this case. The Witness’ Mental Or Physical Disabilities, If Any
       
Crown counsel indicated, during the course of her submissions, that the Complainant has no mental or physical disabilities. There is no physical or mental reason, therefore, why the Complainant is unable to testify in open court. The Nature Of The Offence
       
I am led to understand by the evidence that has been led so far, and by counsel, that the allegations involve one encounter in the Complainant’s BMW automobile. I am further led to understand by counsel, based on the Complainant’s statement to the police, that the Complainant instigated the encounter. 
       
At the time of the alleged offence the Accused was a substitute teacher in the high school attended by the Complainant. This, and the difference in the ages of the Complainant and the Accused, give rise to the allegation that the Accused abused a position of trust or authority that she occupied vis-à-vis the Complainant.
       
In R. v. L.(M.), 2018 NLSC 35, I granted the complainant’s application to testify by means of CCTV. In that case, as well, the complainant was 21 years of age at the time that she testified. However, in L.(M.) the complainant had been continuously sexually assaulted by her step-father from the time that she was 15 years of age until the time that she was 18 years of age. At the time of the trial he was still her step-father. She was terrified of him and of the prospect of having to divulge the intimate details of their three year relationship in his presence. The complainant in L.(M.) testified during the application hearing. I heard from her, first hand, the impact that testifying in open court would have upon her and her ability to provide a full and frank account of what had transpired. I do not have the benefit of the Complainant’s first hand testimony in the case now before me.
       
The Complainant in this case is not being asked to divulge intimate details about a three year relationship. He is being asked to provide evidence as to what happened on one occasion. The only evidence he presents in support of his Application is that he will not be able to testify if he has to give evidence in the same room as the Accused. He deposes that the prospect of giving evidence in open court causes him a lot of stress.
       
The prospect of giving testimony in open court probably causes most witnesses some degree of stress. The Complainant swears, “That I want to testify, but I will not be able to give evidence if I have to be in the same room as the Accused”. This statement is in the nature of a conclusion with no foundation.
       
In other cases quoted to me, such as R. v. Levogiannis, 1993 CanLII 47 (SCC), 4 S.C.R. 475 and R. v. Adeagbo, 2017 NLTD(G) 156, there was evidence led from psychologists, victim services workers or others who were able to quantify the impact on the witness of having to testify in open court. Here, all I have is the Complainant’s conclusion, and I do not find it satisfactory because he has provided no basis in fact. The Nature Of The Relationship Between The Victim And The Accused
       
At the time of the alleged incident the Complainant was a student and the Accused was a substitute teacher. That relationship would give rise to an inference that there was an imbalance in their relationship.
       
However, based upon the evidence that I have heard so far in this trial, it would appear that the Complainant, at least, treated the relationship as more of one of equals. He was, it would appear, a demanding student. He was given to yelling at his teachers (regular and substitute). He asked his teacher to mark him present in class, when he was absent, in exchange for cleaning up the classroom. He once had physical access to the Accused’s telephone. 
       
I am advised by Defence counsel that the Complainant, in his statement to the police, intimated that he continued with his life as normal after the incident. This does not support his position that he has been suffering from stress.
       
There is absolutely no ongoing relationship between the Accused and the Complainant today. So, as far as testifying is concerned, this is not a factor that I need consider in making my decision. Whether The Witness Needs The Order For Their Security Or To Protect Them From Intimidation Or Retaliation
       
This factor was not averred to in the Complainant’s affidavit and, in any case, is not a factor that I need to consider. There is no evidence of any possibility of intimidation or retaliation. Society’s Interest In Encouraging The Reporting Of Offences And The Participation Of Victims And Witnesses In The Criminal Justice Process
       
It goes without saying that if, in every case, accommodations were made for witness’ testimony that this would encourage the reporting of offences and would give some comfort to victims and witnesses in the criminal justice process. 
       
Parliament has seen fit, where complainants are under the age of 18 years, or have a mental or physical disability, to mandate under sections 486.1(1) and 486.2(1) of the Criminal Code that testimonial aids in the form of support persons/screens and testifying from remote locations be provided.
       
Parliament has not, however, seen fit to make those testimonial aids mandatory in the case of persons over the age of 18 who are able bodied and are not suffering from any mental disability.
       
The standard, therefore, is in-court testimony for persons falling outside the ambit of sections 486.1(1) and 486.2(1) of the Criminal Code. Any deviation from that norm requires the trial judge’s exercise of discretion in favour of the application.
       
In order for me to exercise my discretion in favour of granting the testimonial aid sought, I must be satisfied on a balance of probabilities that the granting of the Application would facilitate a full and candid account by the Complainant.
       
The Complainant’s conclusion that he cannot testify is not supported by anything other than his assertion that he feels stressed and that he wants to put all of this behind him. 
       
In order to convince me to exercise my discretion in favour of the Application I would have been more inclined if the Application was supported by the opinion of a qualified third party who could assess the effect of the Complainant’s stress on his ability to provide a full and candid account of the acts complained of. I might, similarly, have been more inclined if the Complainant had testified and afforded me the opportunity to assess, for myself, whether the giving of out-of-court testimony would facilitate the giving of a full and candid account of what had transpired.
       
The material that has been provided to me falls considerably short of the required mark. disposition
       
  For these reasons the Application is dismissed.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/nl/pc/2023canlii466.html
           
At the end of the trial, the accused admitted that he had breached the non-contact bail condition which prohibited contact with his former common law spouse. A conviction was entered for that offence, and a presentence report was ordered, returnable January 11, 2023. I undertook to file written reasons explaining my analysis of the other charges for the same date. Given the nature and circumstances of the offence, and the conduct of the accused, the accused was remanded into custody to await the preparation of the presentence report.
           
I have concluded that the other charges have been proven by the Crown to the requisite standard of proof beyond reasonable doubt. The following reasons explain my conclusions. LAW
           
In Canadian criminal law, every person who is accused of having committed an offence is presumed innocent.  The burden of proof as to guilt is always on the Crown, and never shifts to the accused. If the Crown cannot prove the alleged offence was committed by the accused, then the presumption of innocence prevails, and the charge is dismissed.
           
The standard of proof required of the Crown is proof beyond reasonable doubt. While proof beyond reasonable doubt is not proof to a certainty, it is much closer to that than to the civil standard of proof on a balance of probabilities. 
           
In R. v. Lifchus, 1997 CanLII 319 (SCC), 3 S.C.R. 320, the Supreme Court of Canada said that proof beyond a reasonable doubt “does not involve proof to an absolute certainty, it is not proof beyond any doubt nor is it an imaginary or frivolous doubt.”  In R. v. Starr, 2000 SCC 40 (CanLII), 2 S.C.R. 144, the Court said that the burden of proof placed upon the Crown lies much closer to absolute certainty than to a balance of probabilities.
           
These twin pillars, the onus of proof being on the Crown and the standard required of proof beyond reasonable doubt, apply to every criminal case, including this one. It is crucial to keep in mind that a criminal trial is not a “credibility contest”, in which one chooses one version of events over another. In R. v. T. (S.), 2015 MBCA 36 (CanLII), at para 6, Justice Mainella said as follows: “The role of an appellate court is not to take a microscope to a trial judge’s reasons, and to afford a high degree of deference to credibility findings. 
Trial judges are presumed to know the law, there is no mandatory order they must follow in making credibility findings, and they do not have to explain in detail the process they have followed in reaching a verdict so long as the path to the decision is intelligible (R. v. Vuradin, 2013 SCC 38 at para. 21, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 639; and R. v. R.E.M., 2008 SCC 51 at para. 24, [2008] 3 S.C.R. 3). 
That said, a trial judge cannot render a verdict in a criminal case by the process of simply deciding which competing narrative of events he or she prefers; that is the so-called “credibility contest” error (R. v. S. (W.D.), 1994 CanLII 76 (SCC), [1994] 3 S.C.R. 521 at 533-35; and J.H.S. at para. 9). 
The burden of proof on the Crown to displace the presumption of innocence is more demanding.  A trial judge must decide, on the whole of the evidence, whether they are left with a reasonable doubt about the guilt of the accused (R. v. C.L.Y., 2008 SCC 2 at paras. 6-8, [2008] 1 S.C.R. 5). (emphasis added)
           
We move to consider the credibility of the accused. Credibility
           
In R. v. W. (D.), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), Cory J. suggested a three-step instruction to a trier of fact, as follows:
          First, if you believe the evidence of the accused, obviously you must acquit. Second, if you do not believe the testimony of the accused but you are left in reasonable doubt by it, you must acquit. Third, even if you are not left in doubt by the evidence of the accused, you must ask yourself whether, on the basis of the evidence which you do accept, you are convinced beyond a reasonable doubt by that evidence of the guilt of the accused.
           
As will become clear in these reasons, I did not believe his evidence, nor did it raise a reasonable doubt. It will also become clear that the Crown had met the high onus upon it of proving the alleged offences beyond reasonable doubt.
       
The accused candidly admitted that he had agreed to let his children spend Mother’s Day with their mother, and had sent a message to the third party to that effect. He also admitted that he changed his mind because “her family were disrespecting me”. He said “I was not giving in to them”, and “I felt why give in, when they are so confrontational”. 
       
This was not a father who was concerned about the best interests of his children. The three children, who had been in the back seat of the Volkswagen for a couple of hours, were all asleep. The youngest had a full diaper, and, according to the accused, he also had “open wounds”, which I take him to mean diaper rash.
       
While on the one hand the accused dismissed the efforts by his former father in law and the new boyfriend to restrain him, he also claimed that he had been choked by the two men. The accused claimed that he had closed the car door on the complainant’s arm because he “feared for my children” and because the complainant “was trying to abduct my children from me”.
       
This left a glaring conflict in the evidence of the accused: did he go there to hand over the children to their mother, or was the mother of the children trying to abduct the three children? Added to that were the self-contradictions: he wanted to let the children spend Mother’s Day with their mother, but changed his mind when the maternal grandfather of the children “disrespected” him. While denying that he had been upset, the accused admitted that he was, as he put it, “worked up”.
       
The accused also testified that he “wasn’t sure” about all of the events which took place that night near the mailboxes in Winterland, and, while he had claimed that he had been punched, he could not remember it happening. This from the same witness who had dismissed the efforts by the two other men to restrain him because “they didn’t know how to choke me correctly”.
       
In the W.(D.) analysis, I did not believe the evidence of the accused, and his evidence did not raise a reasonable doubt with me. I should here also say that the evidence of his girlfriend was at odds with the evidence of everyone, including the accused. Let me explain.
       
Under direct examination, the accused’s girlfriend said that they had gone to Winterland to collect a compressor which had been in storage at the complainant’s home. The accused had told the complainant on May 6 that he wanted his compressor, and she had put it out at the end of her driveway. He had one of her neighbors collect and store it overnight for him. The three children were in the back seat of the car. She said that, at around 6:30 p.m., they used her cell phone and texted the complainant’s mother. The text was to let the complainant know that the accused had changed his mind, and was now willing to let the three children spend Mother’s Day with their mother. 
       
There was no reply to the text, and so a second message was sent at around 8:00 p.m. She said that they waited, “for hours”, with the three children asleep in the back of the car.
       
When asked to describe the events at the mailbox parking area, she said that she got out of the car, and turned around to see the complainant’s father and boyfriend both holding the accused by the throat. Here it is worth noting that the accused said that his girlfriend was the first person to get out of his car.
       
She said she had not seen the accused with anyone in a headlock. She said that she grabbed the two men who had the accused pinned up against his car and pulled them off him. She said that she did that with one hand on each man. Then, she said, one man punched her in the throat while the other man elbowed her in the clavicle.
       
In the meantime, said the girlfriend, the complainant was trying to get into the Volkswagen by crawling between the accused’s legs. The girlfriend said that the accused had done what she called a “dead man lift” by taking the complainant under the arms and lifting her. That was during the direct examination.
       
Under cross-examination, the accused’s girlfriend agreed that the accused had told Baker to put his cell phone away, and that the refusal to stop video recording the accused prompted the physical confrontation. She was asked why, given her evidence, she had not asked the police to lay charges. Here it must be noted that she had described having been punched in the throat and spit in her face.
       
She replied by saying that she hadn’t wanted to “take their reputation”. She did not explain how testifying in a public courtroom to having been punched in the throat and spit in her face would not have had any impact on someone’s reputation.
       
The girlfriend’s evidence was self-contradictory and confusing. At 6:30 p.m., the children were going to be spending Mother’s Day with their mother. By 8:00 p.m., the children were not going to be spending Mother’s Day with their mother. It was not clear whether the reversal was either because they had had to wait for the complainant to arrive at the collection location, or was because the accused had been “disrespected”, or some combination thereof.
       
We move to a brief review of the remaining evidence, to see whether the Crown has met its onus of proof beyond reasonable doubt. Evidence
       
The evidence can be divided in three parts, based on the dates of the events. I will proceed chronologically.
       
In the month of March, 2022, the accused went to the residence of his former spouse, the mother of his three children. He made several remarks to her about a man she was then seeing, a Mr. Baker, which she recorded on her cell phone. The recordings were played in court, and I summarize them here: a)    
I’ll go to jail for beating that man to within an inch of his life; b)   
The next time that man enters this house, I’m coming with an axe; c)    
That man will die; d)   
I will bury him in the woods; e)    
I have researched this, I know I might get 5 or 6 years for manslaughter; f)     
I’ll break every bone in his body; g)   
No law is ever going to stop me; h)   
I don’t care. He will die; i)      
I will break that man before he dies; j)      
I am going to kill him; k)   
I will make him kill himself; l)      
You will come home to find his blood in the porch; m) 
My axe is in the trunk of my car; n)   
Nothing will stop me from ending him; o)   
A restraining order will not stop me; p)   
You don’t understand the danger that man is in. I am hunting him; q)   
I will go to St. Bernard’s and kill his entire family; r)     
I will drag his lifeless body down in the woods where it won’t be found; & s)     
If you want that man’s death on your hands, I will give it to you.
       
During his cross-examination, the accused admitted to having made these threats, but dismissed the seriousness of them, saying that it was “just talk”. The complainant said that the threats had intimidated her and made her “nervous”. She also said that the accused had made an axe, which he had named “HEL”. When he testified, the accused denied naming an axe, but he said that he “customizes axes as a form of therapy”.
       
In R. v. McRae, 2013 SCC 68 (CanLII), the Supreme Court of Canada said that the actus reus of the offence of uttering threats will be made out if a reasonable person fully aware of the circumstances in which the words were uttered or conveyed would have perceived them to be a threat of death or bodily harm.  The Crown need not prove that the intended recipient of the threat was made aware of it, or if aware of it, that he or she was intimidated by it or took it seriously.
       
The Supreme Court of Canada also said in that case that the mens rea of the offence is made out if the accused intended the words uttered or conveyed to intimidate or to be taken seriously.  It is not necessary to prove an intent that the words be conveyed to the subject of the threat or that the accused intended to carry out the threat.  A subjective standard of fault applies.  However, in order to determine what was in the accused’s mind, a court will often have to draw reasonable inferences from the words and the circumstances, including how the words were perceived by those hearing them.
       
I infer from the number and kinds of threats uttered by the accused that he said those words in an effort to intimidate the complainant. And he was successful in intimidating her. This was not idle banter: these were a series of chilling threats to commit torture, assault, manslaughter, and murder. As a result, the only correct verdict on the charge of uttering threats is a conviction. As will become clear, the complainant did not want him coming back to her home.
       
We move next to the events of May 7, 2022.
       
The accused and his former common law spouse are the parents of three young children, ranging in age from 2 to 7 years old. 
       
In the Spring of 2022, there was no formal court order in place regulating custody and access of and to the children. Instead, the parents, who were communicating through a third party,  had come to an agreement of shared custody. The accused had insisted that the three children would spend Mother’s Day, May 8, 2022, with their father.
       
On the evening of May 7, 2022, the accused sent a text message to the mother of his former common law spouse and mother of his three children. He said that his former spouse could have the three children with her for Mother’s Day, May 8, 2022. He wanted to the do the hand-over of the children that night at her home in Winterland. She replied that she would meet him by the mailboxes location near the fire hall in Winterland. Their usual practice had been to exchange the children in a public location, and she did not want him near her home. It had been in her home where she had recorded the threats listed above.
       
The complainant, her father, and Mr. Baker went to Winterland and parked near the mailboxes. The accused drove past them, sounded his horn, and drove in to near her home. The two men went there, and explained to the accused that the exchange was to be made by the mailboxes.
       
While there is some disagreement between the witnesses as to the exact words exchanged near the complainant’s residence, they all agree that the accused told the two men that the complainant would not be having her children with her for Mother’s Day. The witnesses then drove to the mailbox parking lot.
       
At the mailbox area, there were three vehicles. The complainant was in her car. Her father and boyfriend were in her father’s car. The accused and his girlfriend were in the front seat of his mother’s Volkswagen car, and the three children were in the back seat. I mention the make of the car because the back doors were child-proof locked, and could only be opened from the front of the car.
       
The accused made a remark to the complainant to the effect that she could thank her father for being the reason why she was not going to have her children spend Mother’s Day with her. This is admitted by the accused, who saw no problem connecting the children spending Mother’s Day with their mother with a disagreement he had had with her father. Effectively, he wanted to punish her because he had had words with her father. He was going to use the children to punish her.
       
As might be expected, this did not go over well. The parties got out of their respective vehicles, and a confrontation ensued. It resulted in the accused being charged with two counts of assault, one each against the complainant and her boyfriend. I will begin with the alleged assault of the boyfriend.
       
As he was getting out of the car, Mr. Baker activated the video camera on his cell phone. The accused is seen and heard saying “Put the phone down, you’re not recording me”. When Mr. Baker did not turn off the recorder, the accused approached him and knocked the phone out of his hand. That is clear from the video, which clearly starts with the accused and ends with the video spinning as it was knocked out of Mr. Baker’s hand. 
       
Knocking the cell phone out of someone’s hand is an uninvited application of force, and therefore an assault: see R. v Kilfoy, 2022 CanLII 103551 (NL PC).
       
Mr. Baker and the complainant both said that the accused had put Mr. Baker in a headlock. The accused denies having put Mr. Baker in a headlock, and in fact counters with his own allegation, to the effect that Mr. Baker choked him. He qualified that by saying that Baker and the complainant’s father were amateurs, in that they didn’t know how to effectively choke him, and so their efforts to restrain him were unsuccessful.
       
The assault of Mr. Baker, by knocking the cell phone out of his hand is proven beyond reasonable doubt. I also conclude that the accused assaulted Mr. Baker by placing him in a headlock. I move to the charge of assaulting his former spouse. 
       
The complainant and Mr. Baker both said that the accused had grabbed her and had knocked her down. Mr. Baker said he tried to stop the accused by pinning him up against the car. In the meantime, the complainant was trying to get the front door open to unlock the child safety lock on the back door. When she got the door open, and put her arm in through the doorway, she said that the accused closed the car door on her arm.
       
The accused tells a slightly different version, but admits having assaulted the complainant. He says that the efforts by the complainant’s father and boyfriend to restrain him were unsuccessful, and that he was able to reach down and take the complainant under the arms and move her away from the car. By definition, his admission to having applied force to her without her consent is an admission of the commission of an assault. He fails to justify the use of force when he claims that he was assaulted and his children were “abducted”. And he admitted closing the car door on the complainant’s arm.
       
Eventually, the children were taken out of the Volkswagen, and placed in the complainant’s car by their mother and grandfather. There were some further verbal exchanges and then the parties left the area.
       
The third relevant date is August 5, 2022, which is when the accused was alleged to have breached a non-contact bail condition. On May 23, 2022, the accused signed an undertaking given to peace officer after being arrested for uttering threats and assault. He was prohibited from contacting the complainant except by way of CSSD or Family Justice Services.
       
During his cross-examination, he admitted that he had emailed her the following message: I tried sending this to your mother but she’s proven difficult not sire (sic) if she’s relying (sic) my message. If you and [Baker] are not together any longer I have 0 issue with the kids returning to you as it hurts me to keep them from their mother. I was only restricting [Baker] but sadly meant you as well. I asked your mother a few times today and stated if [Baker] ‘s gone then the kids and (sic) return asap. They miss you and I kills(sic) my (sic) not for them to see you the loom (sic) on there (sic) faces when I say they can’t return its (sic) hard!! No need to reply here or you can that’s your call but your mother has stated she don’t send you all messages.
          Thanks
          Arch Gover
       
Given the admission, a conviction was entered for the breach of the non-contact order. The attempt by the accused to control who the complainant dated, long after their separation, is clear. It is also clear that he was restricting the complainant’s access to her three children. The decision to remand the accused
       
It was clear from the evidence that: a)    
The accused had said that no court order would stop him; b)   
The accused had said that he understood the risk of being incarcerated; c)    
The accused had said that no restraining order would stop him; d)   
The accused had admitted to having uttered multiple threats to assault, maim, murder, dismember and bury the body of his former spouse’s boyfriend; e)    
The accused admitted having breached the no-contact order in his bail conditions; and f)     
The accused conflated access to his children with what he perceived to be disrespect from his former common law spouse’s family.
       
Given the risks posed to the complainant and her family, together with the admitted breach of his bail condition, judicial interim release was revoked, and the accused was remanded into custody pending preparation of a presentence report. The accused will be credited for the time spent on remand awaiting preparation of the presentence report. CONCLUSION
       
During a trial for charges of uttering threats, assault, and breach of judicial interim release conditions, the accused admitted to having uttered the threats and to having breached a non-contact bail condition. The Court also found that the Crown had proven the two counts of assault beyond reasonable doubt. The accused was remanded into custody pending the preparation of a presentence report.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/nl/pc/2023canlii605.html
           
Mr. Dyer is charged with 11 offences on a single information. All of the offences except one relate to a single complainant NM. Mr. Dyer has asked to sever count 4 from the information. Count 4 is a single count of sexual assault. The balance of the charges are, assault, uttering threats, harassment and breaking into a dwelling.
 
           
Counsel for the accused is applying pursuant to section 591(3) for the severance order. She has argued that the basis for the severance is:
 
1)   
The charge of sexual assault should be severed as it is discrete in time from the other charges 2)   
The accused wishes to explore the possibility of family violence intervention court with respect to the other charges  
3)   
The inclusion of the sexual assault charge will complicate a proposed section 278 application 4)   
The accused wishes to testify on the sexual assault charge and not on the other offences
           
On the issue of a proposed application to family violence intervention court. She has submitted that she has had discussions with counsel for the crown regarding the accused’s eligibility for that Court. She has stated that she has been told that but for the sexual assault charge, he would be eligible and accepted to that court.
 
           
She has also submitted that she has received “a massive package of electronic, social media and text messages between the applicant and the complainant (estimate is well over 1000 items) spanning over a lengthy period (in excess of a year)”. She has submitted that if the sexual assault charge remains on the information the accused will need to make a 278 application with respect to all the charges. This would result in a lengthy more complex process whereas if the sexual assault charge were severed any section 278 application with respect to it would be much shorter and simpler. 
 
           
She submits that the sexual assault charge is alleged to have occurred on a single date on September 7, 2020. A date separate from the other allegations of physical assault, harassment, break and entry and uttering threats. She has said it is the intention of the accused to testify in relation to the sexual assault count but not on the other charges. 
 
           
Counsel for the crown opposes the application for severance and takes the position that the allegation of sexual assault is not an isolated incident but “part of an ongoing tirade of abuse.” She has submitted the fact that the accused wishes to testify with respect to one allegation and not the others is not in and of itself sufficient to warrant severance. She notes that the accused has not yet made an application pursuant to section 278 and does not believe any such application would be necessarily lengthy. Finally, she has submitted that the accused is not a suitable candidate for Family Violence Intervention Court and she would not support an application for him to engage in that process.
 
            
Severance of a count or counts may be ordered when the accused establishes that the interests of justice require it. The accused must establish this on a balance of probabilities (R v B (M.O.) 123 CCC 3(d) BCCA paragraph 270.  Both counsel have relied on R V Last 2009 SCC 45 (CanLII), S.C.J. No. 45. 
Courts have given shape to the broad criteria established in s. 591(3) and have identified factors that can be weighed when deciding whether to sever or not. The weighing exercise ensures that a reasonable balance is struck between the risk of prejudice to the accused and the public interest in a single trial. It is important to recall that the interests of justice often call for a joint trial. Litchfield, where the Crown was prevented from arguing the case properly because of an unjudicial severance order, is but one such example. Severance can impair not only efficiency but the truth-seeking function of the trial. 18 The factors identified by the courts are not exhaustive. They simply help capture how the interests of justice may be served in a particular case, avoiding an injustice. Factors courts rightly use include: the general prejudice to the accused; the legal and factual nexus between the counts; the complexity of the evidence; whether the accused intends to testify on one count but not another; the possibility of inconsistent verdicts; the desire to avoid a multiplicity of proceedings; the use of similar fact evidence at trial; the length of the trial having regard to the evidence to be called; the potential prejudice to the accused with respect to the right to be tried within a reasonable time; and the existence of antagonistic defences as between co-accused persons: R. v. E. (L.) (1994), 1994 CanLII 1785 (ON CA), 94 C.C.C. (3d) 228 (Ont. C.A.), at p. 238; R. v. Cross (1996), 1996 CanLII 5992 (QC CA), 112 C.C.C. (3d) 410 (Que. C.A.), at p. 419; R. v. Cuthbert (1996), 1996 CanLII 8341 (BC CA), 106 C.C.C. (3d) 28 (B.C.C.A.), at para. 9, aff'd 1997 CanLII 397 (SCC), [1997] 1 S.C.R. 8 (sub nom. R. v. C. (D.A.)).
            
In dealing with the application, the first issue addressed by counsel for the accused is the issue of his participation in Family Violence Intervention Court. That court is a specialized therapeutic court. It is described on the provincial court website as:
 
FVIC is a specialized criminal court, which in law operates in the same manner as traditional criminal justice courts, but is administered in a manner that attempts to better serve victims and hold offenders more accountable. This specialized court requires the offender to participate in intervention or The Judge considers participation in FVIC, intervention, and bail supervision in determining programming regarding family violence. The goal of the Court is to prevent and reduce incidents of family violence by addressing the root causes of violence through teamwork with key community partners. Working together allows faster access to services for the victim and offender. The Court focuses on improving victim safety and offender responsibility. FVIC sits in St. John's 2 Wednesday afternoons per month (alternating with the Mental Health Court) and in Stephenville on alternate Wednesday afternoons of the same month.
 
To be eligible to participate in the court: 
 
Males or females 18 years or older charged with: Criminal Code offenses, eligible for community disposition, involving current or past intimate partner relationships including: Breaches of or failure to comply with court orders,  Mischief, destruction of property, Uttering threats, criminal harassment,  Assault, assault with a weapon or causing bodily harm.
 
 
 
           
 Participation in that process requires that the crown attorney make an initial assessment that the offences themselves are eligible. If the crown attorney determines that the charges are eligible, the accused may start the process by undergoing a psychological assessment to see if he/she would be suitable to participate. If the accused is deemed acceptable, he/she may go on with the process by entering guilty pleas to the offences. There is no provision for judicial review of the decision to accept the accused into the program at the initial stage. It is initially solely a decision by the crown attorney followed by a psychological assessment.
 
       
In Krieger v Law Society of Alberta, S...J. No. 45 the court took the positon that in criminal proceedings the exercise of prosecutorial discretion in core areas of the Attorney General’s office was not subject to review except in exceptional circumstances holding: 
    
We agree with these comments. The quasi-judicial function of the Attorney General cannot be subjected to interference from parties who are not as competent to consider the various factors involved in making a decision to prosecute. To subject such decisions to political interference, or to judicial supervision, could erode the integrity of our system [page390] of prosecution. Clearly drawn constitutional lines are necessary in areas subject to such grave potential conflict.”
 
       
There are limited instances in which courts have subjected prosecutorial discretion to review. These are instances where there has been flagrant impropriety (Campbell v. Ontario 1987 CanLII 4333 (ON CA), O.J. No.338) or where the prosecutor acted in bad faith or for an improper purpose (Krieger law Society of Alberta supra) or with a lack of objectivity (R v Nixon S.C.J. No.4.).
 
       
  In this case there is no evidence that the crown attorney has acted inappropriately in assessing Mr. Dyer’s suitability for inclusion in the Family Violence Intervention Court Counsel for the accused has not suggested that there is any abuse of process rather she has expressed her view that the accused would benefit from inclusion in that court and that the process itself is beneficial to the administration of Justice. I agree that Family Violence Intervention Court is an effective and beneficial addition to the response to intimate partner violence. However, I find that I cannot look behind the decision of the crown attorney to not accept the accused into that process. 
 
       
The process currently in place for admission to the court does not provide for judicial review in the selection process The process itself is multifaceted, there are eligibility criteria for which offences the Court may consider and then two distinct stages, the initial prosecutorial charge screening followed by a psychological risk assessment. This is not a process that lends itself readily to review and falls squarely into the area of core prosecutorial discretion. Consequently, I cannot find that the accused’s potential admission to Family Violence Intervention Court to resolve some of the offences provides a basis for severance of the count.
 
       
 Counsel for the accused has indicated that the accused intends to testify with respect to count 4 but not with respect to the other counts. This is a factor that can be considered by the trial judge to justify severance of a count from the Information. The accused’s desire to testify must be objectively justifiable. (Last supra, paragraph 146). The justification would consist of the type of potential defences open to the accused or the nature of his testimony. (Last paragraph 26). Counsel for the accused has not provided detail about the nature of the proposed evidence. However, it is clear that a sexual assault allegation may well involve issues that are unique to that offence and different form the balance of the allegations on the Information. There is a basis to conclude that his desire to testify on that count and not the others is objectively justifiable. 
 
       
In addition, counsel for the accused has indicated that there may be an application pursuant to section 278:  “if he wishes to reference the electronic messages in the disclosure package”. On this last point, counsel has suggested that this would have the effect of lengthening the trial and adding days of court time. That seems possible depending on the amount of electronic disclosure the accused intends to refer to in his defence. I cannot make a determination on that issue without more evidence on the point. Counsel has not filed a section 278 application and is not in a positon at this stage to properly set out the scope of the application.
 
       
On balance, I note that the charges date from 28th October 2019 to the 11th of April 2021. The single count sought to be severed falls within this date range and counts 5, 6 and 7 are alleged to have occurred on the same date as count 4. All four of these allegations are alleged to have occurred on the 7th of September, 2020. The two main witnesses are the same in relation to all of the counts. Count 4 is not therefore isolated in time from the other offences and does not have a separate group of witnesses distinguishing it from the other counts. Similarly, the nature of the allegation bears similarity to the other offences and arises from the relationship of the accused with the complainant.
 
       
I find as a result that on considering the factors for the purpose of ensuring a reasonable balance "between the risk of prejudice to the accused and the public interest in a single trial". I can find no general prejudice to the accused in proceeding with a single trial. The evidence is not complex, and the desire to avoid multiplicity of proceedings favours a single trial. Further, while there is an objectively justifiable rationale for the accused to testify on count 4, but not on the other counts; that in itself is not a significant factor favoring severance. The length of the trial, or trials, and the right of the accused to be tried within a reasonable time, are neutral factors in this case. Finally, with respect to the possibility of a section 278 application complicating the proceeding, that is an issue that may be addressed if the application is filed and it appears that severing of the count becomes necessary at that time.
 
       
 Application dismissed.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/nl/pc/2023canlii2521.html 1)   
 An order under the Sex Offender Information Registration Act pursuant to section  490.013 
 
2)   
 On order that he provide a sample of  his DNA pursuant to section 487.051(1)
 
3)   
 A Prohibition Order pursuant to section 109(1) prohibiting him from possessing any firearms or any of the items listed therein for a period of ten years  
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/nl/pc/2023canlii460.html
    On January 31, 2022, the police received a complaint of an assault from a residence in Pasadena.  The police responded to the call and spoke to the person who had made the complaint (Ms. X) at the residence. She alleged that she had been assaulted by Ms. Laite, her former partner.  A subsequent investigation resulted in Ms. Laite being charged with the offences of assault, assault with a weapon, assault causing bodily harm, and the commission of an assault in which the complainant was choked, contrary to sections 266, 267(a), 267(b) and 267(c) of the Criminal Code of Canada, R.S.C. 1985.  Ms. Laite pleaded not guilty to these charges and a trial was conducted. 
The Issue:
    The sole issue that I must decide is whether the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Ms. Laite committed the offences with which she is charged.  
 
 
My Decision:
    Based upon the totality of the evidence presented, I am satisfied that the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Ms. Laite assaulted Ms. X and that she assaulted her and caused her bodily harm, contrary to sections 266 and 267(b) of the Criminal Code.  However, the Crown has failed to prove that Ms. Laite assaulted Ms. X with a weapon or that she choked her during the commission of an assault.  As a result, Ms. Laite is acquitted of the charges laid against her contrary to sections 267(a) and 267(c) of the Criminal Code. 
    Let me explain my reasons for these conclusions by commencing with a review of the evidence presented at the trial. 
The Evidence Presented at the Trial:
    The evidence presented at the trial established that Ms. Laite and Ms. X had been involved in a relationship over an extended period of time.  Both Ms. X and Ms. Laite testified that the relationship involved a lot of arguing.  Both testified and described various physical altercations.  
    In September of 2016, they began to live together in Pasadena.  The complaint the police received on January 31, 2022, originated from this residence.  Corporal Christopher Pittman and Constable Jensen Stanley, who responded to the complaint, went to the residence and spoke to Ms. X on that day.   This conversation was audio taped. 
    Corporal Pittman described Ms. X as being “visibly upset”.  Constable Stanley described Ms. X as “shaken”.  Neither officer saw any injuries to Ms. X. Ms. X’s Testimony:
    Ms. X testified that she and Ms. Laite had been together since 2015.  She testified that “at first”, their relationship was “good”.  However, “early on” they began to argue a lot.  Ms. X testified that this did not initially involve any physical violence, but that it escalated from “yelling to being physical”. 
The Choking:
    Ms. X testified that during arguments, Ms. Laite would often place her hands around her neck. 
She indicated that initially this would occur about once a month, but became a more regular occurrence.  Ms. X testified that Ms. Laite would routinely push her head into a pillow if they argued while in bed.  She indicated that “she would get mad at me and I think that was an attempt to stop it, or stop me from, you know, nitpicking or being upset or angry or continuing on with the argument”.  
  Ms. X testified that the choking “was not hard enough to leave marks”, but that it sometimes affected her breathing.   
  Ms. X also testified that Ms. Laite would at times grab her by her shirt collar, “restricting” her neck.   
  Finally, Ms. X testified that Ms. Laite also routinely pushed her against the walls in the residence they shared in Pasadena.  She described Ms. Laite grabbing her arms and placing her forearm against her throat. She testified that this occurred “often” and that it made it difficult for her to breathe. 
Throwing the Box:
  The evidence presented at the trial established that on January 15, 2022, Ms. Laite contacted the Royal Canadian Mounted Police because she was concerned about Ms. X’s wellbeing, based upon a comment Ms. X had made before leaving the residence. 
After the police spoke to Ms. X and concluded there were no concerns, Ms. X returned home.
  Ms. X testified that after this contact with the police, she and Ms. Laite had an argument about a movie.  She testified that Ms. Laite threw a cardboard box and a dog bed at her and grabbed her by the collar: We got into a fight about a movie that I got upset over, and she had a headache at the time and didn’t really wanna [sic] argue about it.  So she went in the spare room, but I was angry, so I got up and I was arguing and I hit the door, and that made her angry so she got up at that point and came out and she got angry as well.  So I remember that was when the things were thrown, so the cardboard and the dog bed and the things, and she grabbed my collar then while she was yelling at me.   
 
  Ms. X testified that she was struck by something that was thrown by Ms. Laite and received a cut on her hand as a result of this incident.  
New Year’s Eve:
  Ms. X testified that on New Year’s Eve, 2021, she and Ms. Laite went to a house party hosted by people Ms. Laite worked with.  She indicated that while at the party, Ms. Laite made a comment about her having broken her cellular phone on Christmas Eve.  According to Ms. X, Ms. Laite suggested to her friends that Ms. X had done so purposely. 
Ms. X testified that she found this to be embarrassing.  She agreed that she was very upset. 
  Ms. X testified that during the drive home from the party, and after they arrived at their residence, she and Ms. Laite were arguing over this comment.  Ms. X indicated that she was very upset and was “yelling” at Ms. Laite.  
  Ms. X testified that that she walked into their bedroom.  Ms. X described Ms. Laite entering the bedroom and pushing her with her two hands.  Ms. X testified that this caused her to fall, striking the bed before ending up on the floor: When we got home I was really upset over it.  You know, these were her people and I was angry and embarrassed, then so I got upset and I got angry.  I started to get mad at her for it and I was yelling as I went into the bedroom.  I don’t remember when she came in but when she came in she pushed me and that’s when I fell and I hit the bed and I fell to the floor then. Q.      Are you able to describe that push for us?  How was the push done?
 
A.      I was facing the door, I was back onto the bed.  I don’t remember exactly how she came at me.
 
Q.      What part of, I guess, her body would make contact with your body for the push?
 
A.      Just the chest area, just pushing.
 
Q.      What did she push you with?
 
A.      Her hands.
 
Q.      Can you describe the force of the push?
 
A.      It was hard.  I cut the top of my butt on the corner of the bed and that’s where most of the bruising came from.  And then I--as I went down my side and my arm hit the board along the side of the bed and it scraped and dragged across that.
 
Q.      Sorry, so you talked about you cut the top of your butt off the corner of the bed, your side just to make sure we get it all.
 
A.      So the side of my right side of the body would hit the board that runs along the bottom of the bed as I went to the floor.
 
Q.      And then anything else?  I thought you mentioned one more thing.
 
A.      I cut my arm, so the whole kind of the right side, my rib, my tri-cep area elbow.
 
Q.      And what happened then?
 
A.      It hurt.  I remember that one being painful.  And I know when I got up she was trying to leave.  I remember trying to stop her.  
  Photographs that were entered as an exhibit, show marks and bruising to various parts of Ms. X’s body, including her right side. Striking Ms. X in the Jaw:
  Ms. X testified that as Ms. Laite was leaving the bedroom, she got up off of the floor and grabbed Ms. Laite by her arm.  She described Ms. Laite pulling her arm away and striking her in the jaw.  Ms. X felt that this occurred accidentally as Ms. Laite moved her arm away. 
  Ms. X testified that Ms. Laite then went toward the porch so as to leave the residence through the front door.  Ms. X indicated that she grabbed the door leading in to the porch in order to prevent Ms. Laite from leaving.  Ms. X testified that Ms. Laite stuck her hand, causing her to lose her grip, opened the door and left the residence. 
  However, Ms. X also testified that Ms. Laite slept on a sofa in the living room after the incident in which she described being pushed against the bed.  Ms. X was uncertain about the sequence or timing of these events. 
At The New Year’s Eve Party:
  On December 31, 2021, Mr. Robert Mercer, a co-worker and friend of Ms. Laite, had a New Year’s Eve party at his residence.  Ms. Laite and Ms. X attended the party.
  Mr. Mercer testified that Ms. X was consuming alcohol and becoming “increasingly intoxicated.”  He testified that while she was sitting on a stool in his kitchen, Ms. X “slipped off of the stool” and fell on to the floor, spilling a drink she had in her hand against a wall.  
  Mr. Mercer testified that he was not “concerned” that Ms. X was hurt and he did not see any injuries.  He indicated that the fall was not a “bad fall” nor “a violent one”.  
  Mr. Mercer testified that when Ms. X and Ms. Laite left his residence, Ms. X was “drunk”.
  Mr. Chris Horan, one of Ms. Laite’s co-workers and a friend of hers, was also at the party. He described Ms. X as being “intoxicated”. He indicated that she was “loud, her speech was slurred and she stumbled”. 
  Mr. Horan testified that he was standing next to Ms. X near a kitchen counter.  He indicated that he was talking to her and that Ms. X fell on to the floor.  He described her feet “slipping out” from underneath her.  
  Mr. Horan testified that Ms. X hit the floor hard, striking her “butt” as she did so.  However, Mr. Horan agreed that Ms. X did not appear to have been hurt by the fall.  He was not concerned about her being injured.  He also testified that she subsequently got up and answered a telephone call she received. 
  When asked if Ms. X could have fallen because she was bending over to pick something up, Mr. Horan replied that he “did not believe” she would have fallen in the manner she did if this had occurred. 
  Ms. X denied that she “fell over” by the counter.  She testified that she had “squatted” down to pick up something she had dropped and lost her balance.  She testified that she did not hit her back or her buttocks or cause any injury to herself. 
Ms. X was not cross-examined on whether she slipped off a stool at the party. Alcohol Consumption on December 31, 2021:
  Ms. X testified that Ms. Laite had one alcoholic drink that evening.  She described herself as “drinking all night”, having “quite a lot to drink”, and being “very drunk”.  Ms. X agreed that she subsequently vomited when she returned home. However, she maintained that the alcohol consumption had not affected her memory of the assault that occurred when she and Ms. Laite returned home.  
  In the statement Ms. X provided to the police on January 31, 2022, she described being “very drunk” on New Year’s Eve and indicated that she could not remember “a whole lot about it”.  In a statement she provided to investigators on February 9, 2022, she indicated that she could not “remember that night completely because I was drinking”.  
  In her testimony, Ms. X said that she could “not remember a lot about that night” but that she recalled the assault that occurred.  She indicated that she was “not saying” the alcohol had no effect, but that she could recall the assault.  
January 2022, At Work:
  Mr. JP works with Ms. X.  He testified that in early January, 2022, she was “not herself” while at work.  He testified that he spoke to her and she began to “cry”.  He described her as being “distraught”. 
  Mr. JP testified that that Ms. X told him that she had been assaulted by Ms. Laite on New Year’s Eve.  She showed him bruises on her upper arm and he noticed that there was some “redness” in the area of her jaw.  He described the bruises as being a “dark purple” in color with one on the front of her arm and one on the back.       In cross-examination, Mr. JP was asked to describe what Ms. X told him about the assault.  He indicated that she had told him that Ms. Laite struck her, causing her to fall on to the floor.  He also indicated that Ms. X said that Ms. Laite struck her while she was on the floor.  He was “not sure” if she said she had been punched or kicked while on the floor. 
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/nl/pc/2023canlii3051.html
    It is rare for young offenders to be sentenced to a custodial sentence.  The policy against the use of custody as a sentence, unless there are no reasonable alternatives, is enshrined in the Youth Criminal Justice Act, S.C. 2002 (see section 38(2)(d)).
    In this case, BM was involved in a relationship with another teenager (Ms. X).  After a trial, he was convicted of having assaulted her, contrary to section 266 of the Criminal Code of Canada, R.S.C. 1985 (see N.J. No. 264 (P.C.)).  In addition, he has pleaded guilty to having committed the offences of uttering a threat to kill Ms. X and breaching a release order that prohibited him from having contact with her, contrary to sections 145(4)(a) and 264.1(1) of the Criminal Code. 
The Issue:
    The sole issue I must determine is what constitutes an appropriate sentence for the offences committed by BM.  BM is sixteen years of age. He has no prior convictions. 
    In R. v. McClements, 2017 MBCA 104, the Manitoba Court of Appeal indicated that “fundamental” to the sentencing regime contained within the Youth Criminal Justice Act “is the presumption of diminished moral blameworthiness for young persons, which recognizes that ‘because of their age, young [persons] have heightened vulnerability, less maturity and a reduced capacity for moral judgment’” (at paragraph 34).  However, in R. v. Joseph, 2020 ONCA 73, the Ontario Court of Appeal noted that while “rehabilitation is an important factor for consideration when sentencing a youth, there are other ‘important factors that are integral to the accountability inquiry’” mandated by the Youth Criminal Justice Act (at paragraph 105). My Decision:
    The offences committed by BM are serious. Assaults that occur in relationships are not diminished by the ages of the offender or the victim.  However, in sentencing young offenders, the sentencing principle of general deterrence does not apply (see R. v. B.M.S., 2016 NSCA 35, at paragraph 31). As a result, the imposition of a custodial sentence is less likely, despite the seriousness of the offence.  
    I conclude that an appropriate sentence in this case is the placing of BM on probation for twelve months and ordering him to perform thirty hours of community service work.  I have concluded that this is an appropriate sentence because of BM’s lack of any prior convictions and to encourage his rehabilitation.
    Let me explain my reasons for this conclusion in greater detail by commencing with a review of the circumstances of the offences committed by BM. 
The Assault:
    In convicting BM of the offence of assault, I wrote as follows (at paragraphs 5 to 9, and 45): The evidence presented at the trial established that MB and Ms. X were “dating”. 
On April 10, 2021, they and two of their friends (AC and LD) went to the Greco Restaurant in Corner Brook. 
 
Ms. X testified that while sitting at the restaurant, she received a telephone call from the grandmother of one of her friends.  She stood up to answer it. This appeared to cause MB to become upset.
 
Ms. X testified that while she was talking on the phone, MB grabbed her head and banged it against the wall and then the table.  Ms. X testified that her forehead hit both objects, but that she did not suffer any visible injuries, though she did have a bad headache. 
 
LD testified that the incident occurred before Ms. X spoke with her friend’s grandmother.  She testified that Ms. X had asked BM to move so she could leave the table.  He refused and she tried to “squeeze” by him.  LD testified that MB grabbed Ms. X’s arm and pushed her against the wall. LD indicated that MB then twisted Ms. X’s arm behind her back and pushed her headfirst on to the table, saying: “Don’t talk to me like that”. 
 
Ms. X testified that she and LD left the restaurant and were subsequently picked up by her mother. 
 
There is significant if not overwhelming evidence that establishes that BM assaulted Ms. X by pushing her against a wall and banging her head against the table.  I recognize that Ms. X did not suffer any visible physical injuries.   However, I must be careful not to speculate as to what if any injuries would be expected to occur.  This is not one of those cases in which certain injuries would be expected if a description of an assault is accurate (such as a stabbing, for instance).  The lack of a visible injury to Ms. X’s head does not cause me to doubt her description of what occurred. The Threat:
    BM sent Ms. X a number of Snap Chat messages in which he threatened to kill and harm her. 
The Breach of the Release Order:
  BM had been released pursuant to on an order that prohibited him from contacting Ms. X.  Using another person’s phone, he sent Ms. X a message making rude comments about her. 
The Circumstances of the Young Offender:
  BM is sixteen years of age.  He has no prior convictions.  He resides with his mother and step-father.
 BM is not attending school.  He stopped attending in 2021.  He is employed part-time at a department store as a stock clerk.  However, his hours of work are presently limited to approximately four to ten hours per week. Community Service Work:
  The pre-sentence report indicates that BM “expressed that he is wanting to make amends for this crimes. He is hoping to get community service and is willing to do whatever he is tasked with doing. BM is physically able to participate in community service work. He does not drive but his mother, father, stepfather and grandmother have all been supportive in providing him with rides to work”. The report also indicates that  BM “has the time available to complete community service work. There are a number of non-profit community organizations that are willing to take youth offenders and have work that needs to be completed. The Humber Community YMCA and Community Youth Network are examples”.  At the sentence hearing, the youth court worker indicated that thirty hours of community service work could be obtained and completed in a reasonable period of time.    
The Youth Court Worker’s Recommendations:
  The youth court worker made the following recommendations as regards sentencing: Given B’s willingness to make amends, Child and Youth Services assesses that B would benefit from supervised probation, completing an apology letter to the victim, and engaging in services deemed necessary by CYS or other service providers, such as counseling. Counseling options within this province currently require the youth's consent for service. While B is not open to counseling at this time, I recommend that he attend Mental Health and Addictions counseling through Blomidon Place. I also recommend that B attend and engage in an education program to meet the requirements for graduation.  
From a Child and Youth Services perspective, B was cooperative during each of our meetings and it appears that there would be no concerns with supervising B in the community or finding a community service placement for him. B currently has stable housing, part-time employment, and the support from his family. B presents as committed to carrying out the conditions that will be set out for him upon sentencing.  
 
 
The Principles of Sentencing Applicable to Young Offenders:
  In R. v. D.W., 2011 NLCA 21, the Court of Appeal indicated that “sentencing under the [Youth Criminal Justice Act] focuses on the individual young person and how best to achieve the stated objectives of the [Youth Criminal Justice Act] in the particular circumstances” (at paragraph 16). In R. v. P.R., 2018 SKCA 27, the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal indicated that imposing sentence upon a young offender requires “a context specific approach; an approach that differs entirely from the sentencing regime for adult offenders” (at paragraph 61).  However, in R. v. JGHW, 2020 MBCA 86, the Manitoba Court of Appeal held that while a sentence must “promote the rehabilitation and reintegration into society of the young person”, it must also “hold the young person accountable through meaningful consequences” that “reflect the consequential harm of the young person’s actions or the normative character of his conduct” (at paragraph 41). 
The Sentencing Principles Set Out in the Youth Criminal Justice Act:
  Section 3(1) of the Youth Criminal Justice Act sets out a number of principles that are to be applied to the sentencing of young offenders. 
Section 3(1)(a): Section 3(1)(a) of the Youth Criminal Justice Act indicates that the youth criminal justice system “is intended to protect the public by holding young persons accountable through measures that are proportionate to the seriousness of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the young person” by “promoting the rehabilitation and reintegration of young persons who have committed offences.” Section 3(1)(b): Section 3(1)(b) states that the criminal justice system for young persons “must be based on the principle of diminished moral blameworthiness or culpability” and it must emphasize the following: (i) rehabilitation and reintegration, (ii) fair and proportionate accountability that is consistent with the greater dependency of young persons and their reduced level of maturity, (iii) enhanced procedural protection to ensure that young persons are treated fairly and that their rights, including their right to privacy, are protected, (iv) timely intervention that reinforces the link between the offending behaviour and its consequences, and (v) the promptness and speed with which persons responsible for enforcing this Act must act, given young persons’ perception of time. In R. v. JMO, 2017 MBCA 59, the Manitoba Court of Appeal considered these provisions and suggested that “protection of the public is but one of four conflicting sets of principles set out in section 3” (at paragraph 45). Section 3(1)(c): 
Section 3(1)(c) of the Youth Criminal Justice Act indicates that “within the limits of fair and proportionate accountability, the measures taken against young persons who commit offences” should “(i) reinforce respect for societal values, (ii) encourage the repair of harm done to victims and the community, (iii) be meaningful for the individual young person given his or her needs and level of development and, where appropriate, involve the parents, the extended family, the community and social or other agencies in the young person’s rehabilitation and reintegration, and (iv) respect gender, ethnic, cultural and linguistic differences and respond to the needs of aboriginal young persons and of young persons with special requirements.” In R. v. S.J.L., 2009 SCC 14 (CanLII), 1 S.C.R. 426, the Supreme Court of Canada indicated that “the effect of the objectives of the [Youth Criminal Justice Act] is that the judge is asked to favour rehabilitation, reintegration and the principle of a fair and proportionate accountability that is consistent with the young person’s reduced level of maturity” (at paragraph 75).  Similarly, in R. v. C.D., (2005), 2005 SCC 78 (CanLII), 203 C.C.C. (3d) 449, the Supreme Court of Canada indicated that "the object and scheme of the YCJA, as well as Parliament's intention in enacting it, all indicate that the YCJA was designed, in part, to reduce over-reliance on custodial sentences for young offenders" (at paragraph 50). Section 38 of Youth Criminal Justice Act: In addition, sections 38(1) and (2) of the Youth Criminal Justice Act set out the following as its purposes and principles of sentencing: (1) The purpose of sentencing under section 42 (youth sentences) is to hold a young person accountable for an offence through the imposition of just sanctions that have meaningful consequences for the young person and that promote his or her rehabilitation and reintegration into society, thereby contributing to the long-term protection of the public. (2) A youth justice court that imposes a youth sentence on a young person shall determine the sentence in accordance with the principles set out in section 3 and the following principles: (a) the sentence must not result in a punishment that is greater than the punishment that would be appropriate for an adult who has been convicted of the same offence committed in similar circumstances; (b) the sentence must be similar to the sentences imposed in the region on similar young persons found guilty of the same offence committed in similar circumstances; (c) the sentence must be proportionate to the seriousness of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the young person for that offence; (d) all available sanctions other than custody that are reasonable in the circumstances should be considered for all young persons, with particular attention to the circumstances of aboriginal young persons; (e) subject to paragraph (c), the sentence must (i) be the least restrictive sentence that is capable of achieving the purpose set out in subsection (1), (ii) be the one that is most likely to rehabilitate the young person and reintegrate him or her into society, and (iii) promote a sense of responsibility in the young person, and an acknowledgement of the harm done to victims and the community; and (f) subject to paragraph (c), the sentence may have the following objectives: (i) to denounce unlawful conduct, and (ii) to deter the young person from committing offences.
  In P.R., the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal held that the “use of the word ‘shall’ in the introductory clause to s. 38(2) and the word ‘must’ and ‘should’ in ss. 38(2)(a) to (e) indicate that youth sentencing judges are required to impose a sentence that is in accordance with the principles in s. 3, as well as the specific sentencing principles enumerated in those provisions. They remind judges to reserve the use of a custodial sentence for the most serious offenders and only when a non-custodial sentence would be unable to ensure meaningful accountability and promote the long-term protection of the public” (at paragraph 66).
  The Court of Appeal also held in P.R. that in “the use of the word ‘may’ in s. 38(2)(f) connotes a permissive, rather than obligatory, consideration of denunciation and deterrence as sentencing objectives for youth offenders. 
Judges are permitted to consider the objectives of denunciation and deterrence – specific deterrence only – when sentencing a youth, however, reliance on either is discretionary…If denunciation and deterrence are considered, they must be considered alongside the other sentencing principles expressed in the preamble, the declaratory principles in s. 3, and the mandatory sentencing principles in s. 38” (at paragraph 67). Deterrence:
  Though the sentencing principle of specific deterrence applies to the sentencing of young offenders, the sentencing principle of general deterrence does   not (see R. v. B.M.S., at paragraph 31). 
This distinction highlights the individualized approach to sentencing mandated by the Youth Criminal Justice Act.  
 
 
The Factors to be Considered in Imposing Sentence:
    Section 38(3) of the Youth Criminal Justice Act requires a youth court judge to consider a number of specific factors in in determining an appropriate sentence: (3) In determining a youth sentence, the youth justice court shall take into account (a) the degree of participation by the young person in the commission of the offence; (b) the harm done to victims and whether it was intentional or reasonably foreseeable; (c) any reparation made by the young person to the victim or the community; (d) the time spent in detention by the young person as a result of the offence; (e) the previous findings of guilt of the young person; and (f) any other aggravating and mitigating circumstances related to the young person or the offence that are relevant to the purpose and principles set out in this section. A Summary of the Approach to Sentencing Young Offenders: 
  In summary, when imposing sentence upon a young offender, a youth court judge must keep in mind the inherent differences between adults and young persons as well as the different approaches to sentencing adopted by the Criminal Code and the Youth Criminal Justice Act.  It is well settled that the sentencing principle of general deterrence does not apply and that a custodial sentence should not be imposed unless there are no reasonable alternatives.  This effectively means that if a young offender has no prior convictions, the imposition of a custodial sentence is unlikely.   
  Though the seriousness of the offence committed by a young person is a key factor in determining if a custodial sentence should be imposed, even when the offence committed is a serious one, a custodial sentence can only be imposed if no other sentence is reasonable. Even when a young offender commits a serious offence, a youth court judge must concentrate on rehabilitation and the long-term effect of the sentence imposed.  
  There is a presumption of a diminished moral blameworthiness for young persons who commits crimes (see R. v. M.M., 2022 NSCA 46, at paragraph 47).   Because young people are capable of great reformation, a long-term approach must normally dominate sentencing decisions.  However, the Youth Criminal Justice Act also requires that any sentence imposed be a “meaningful” one that holds the young offender “accountable” for her or his actions.  
  In determining what sentence should be imposed upon a young person, a sentencing judge must consider: -the need to impose a sentence which is proportionate to the seriousness of the offence; 
-that the Youth Criminal Justice Act is not entirely “offender-centric”; 
-that general deterrence is not applicable; -that both specific deterrence and denunciation are applicable; 
-that any sentence imposed must stress the long term goals of rehabilitation and reintegration; 
-that resort to the sentencing principle of retribution will rarely be appropriate; 
-that all available sanctions other than custody that are reasonable in the circumstances must be considered; and 
-the need through sentencing to protect the public, to promote accountability and to impose a sentence that constitutes a meaningful consequence. The Positions of the Parties:
  The Crown recommended that a period of two years of probation and a community service order be imposed.  Mr. Ashton referred to the offences as “serious”, but noted that BM has no prior convictions and that the Youth Criminal Justice Act favours non-custodial sentencing. 
  On behalf, of BM, Ms. Kirkwood submitted that an appropriate range of sentence would extend from a discharge with conditions to a period of probation.  Ms. Kirkwood referred to the principles of sentencing set out in the Youth Criminal Justice Act; BM’s lack of prior convictions; his lack of charges since the offences; and his prospects for rehabilitation.  
  In support of her position, Ms. Kirkwood referred to my decisions in R. v. R.R., N.J. No. 341 (P.C.) and R. v. J.S., N.J. No. 271 (P.C.). 
  In R.R., the young person was convicted of the offences of assault and uttering a threat.  He assaulted a young girl by punching her in the face and sent text messages to another young girl threatening to harm her and her family.  I imposed a period of twelve months of probation.
  In J.S., the young offender committed the offences of assault (two counts), mischief and breach of undertaking, contrary to sections 145(5.1), 266 and 430(1)(a) of the Criminal Code. I described the circumstances involved in the following manner (at paragraphs 3 to 6): JS assaulted a class mate (AG) at school by punching him in the face on two occasions. JS was arrested and released on an undertaking.  One of the conditions of the undertaking prohibited JS from being at the school unless he was attending a class.
 
On February 5, 2016, JS was at the school.  At the time he was suspended and thus was not attending any classes.  The undertaking referred to was in force at the time.
 
On February 26, 2016, JS assaulted another young person (TP) outside of a mall in Corner Brook by punching him in the face three times. 
 
On July 5, 2016, the police received a complaint from JS’s mother.  When the police went to JS’s residence they discovered that JS had become upset and broke a basement window in the residence and windows in his mother’s motor vehicle.
 
  JS was fifteen years of age and he had no prior convictions.
  I imposed a period of twelve months of probation and ordered JS to perform thirty hours of community service work. I wrote that “[c]onsidering the sentencing options available, the circumstances of the offences committed by JS, and JS’s personal circumstances, I conclude that a period of probation for twelve months is an appropriate sentence.  It will promote JS’s rehabilitation and it is, of the sentence options available, the one which will have the most meaningful consequences” (at paragraph 31).
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/nl/pc/2023canlii2060.html
           
These are the reasons for sentencing the accused to a term of imprisonment of 210 days, less credit for time spent on remand and making the sentence for one offence concurrent to the others, resulting in a net sentence of 102 days. LAW
           
The goals of sentencing, and sentencing procedure, are codified in part XXIII of the Criminal Code. The primary goal of sentencing is protection of the public: see R. v. Butler, 2019 NLCA 21. Rehabilitation, general and specific deterrence, and denunciation of crime are also goals of sentencing. We recognize the concept of parity of sentence: sentencing must be proportionate and generally in accord with similar sentences ordered for similar offences, committed by similar offenders. In R. v. Bissonnette, 2022 SCC 23, at para 51, the Court said that proportionality has a restraining function, and in this sense serves to guarantee that a sentence is individualized, just and appropriate.
           
Of particular importance in this case is Criminal Code s. 718.2 (a)(ii): a sentence should be increased or reduced to account for any relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or the offender, and, evidence that the offender, in committing the offence, abused the offender’s intimate partner or a member of the victim or the offender’s family, shall be deemed to be aggravating circumstances.
           
Of similar import is s. 718.201: A court that imposes a sentence in respect of an offence that involved the abuse of an intimate partner shall consider the increased vulnerability of female persons who are victims, giving particular attention to the circumstances of Aboriginal female victims.
           
These provisions are relevant here because the victim of one of the assault offences is the former common law spouse of the accused, and she is the mother of their three children.
           
Incarceration is the last option in sentencing. When the accused breaches court orders, a non-custodial, community-based sentence may not be appropriate, because a community-based sentence pivots on the willingness of the accused to comply with court-ordered conditions. THE CONCEPT OF A RANGE OF SENTENCE
           
In Canada (Attorney General) v. O'Flaherty (1997), 1997 CanLII 14649 (NL CA), 155 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 150 (Nfld. C.A.) at para 20, Steele J.A. said that "The phrase 'range of sentence' is susceptible to different meanings."
           
In R. v. Oake, 2010 NLCA 19, at para 69, Rowe J.A. (as he then was) said that judges must impose sentences in line with precedent, noting always that for each offence and each offender some elements are unique.
           
In R. v. Nasogaluak, 2010 SCC 6, 1 S.C.R. 206 (S.C.C.) at para 44, Lebel J. said that: “... it must be remembered that, while courts should pay heed to these ranges, they are guidelines rather than hard and fast rules. A judge can order a sentence outside that range so long as it is in accordance with the principles and objectives of sentencing. Thus, a sentence falling outside the regular range of appropriate sentences is not necessarily unfit.”
       
In R. v. Lundrigan, 2012 NLCA 43, the Court of Appeal said that a "fit sentence" is one "that takes account of the circumstances of the offences and the offender".
       
In R. v. Cluney, 2013 NLCA 46, at para 22, Barry J.A. cited Nasogaluak and said that “While sentencing ranges are merely guidelines rather than hard and fast rules, a judge ordering a sentence outside the regular range should explain how it is in accordance with the principles and objectives of sentencing”.
       
In R. v. Boudreault, 2018 SCC 58, at para 58, the Supreme Court of Canada said that “sentencing is first and foremost an individualized exercise, which balances the various goals of sentencing, while taking into account the particular circumstances of the offender as well as the nature and number of his or her crimes”.
       
One must conclude from a review of the jurisprudence that sentences should be comparable to the sentences which were imposed in other cases, but tailored to suit the particular circumstances of the accused. The key to sentencing is proportionality. Finding a proportionate sentence requires balancing the circumstances and attitude of the accused, the impact on the victims, and the public interest in denouncing and deterring others from committing these type offences.
       
It must be noted here that the victims of these crimes both filed victim impact statements, and both described the anxiety which continues to haunt them  as a result of the crimes committed against them by the accused.
       
We move now to consider the offences committed by the accused. The Offences Committed by the Accused
       
It is unnecessary to reproduce here the full reasons for convicting the accused, because the reasons for convicting him are reported, at R. v. Gover, N.J. No. 6 (QL).
       
 As a result, I will summarize his offences here. The offences, which were all committed in 2022, comprise three criminal adventures, as the term was coined by the late Goodridge C.J.N. in R. v. Crocker, 1991 CanLII 2737 (NL CA). There are the uttering threats in March, the two assaults in May, and the breach of the “no contact” bail condition in August.  Subject to a consideration of the global sentence for totality, sentences for offences committed on separate dates usually are made consecutive: see R. v. Hutchings, 2012 NLCA 2 (CanLII).
       
As indicated in the reasons for convicting the accused, he uttered a long list of chilling threats to kill his ex spouse’s then boyfriend. These were audio recorded and the recordings were played at trial. A summary of the threats is reproduced in the trial decision, and may be summarized as a long list describing how the accused planned to murder his ex spouse’s then boyfriend, hide his corpse in the woods, and kill his family.
       
At page 8 of the presentence report, the accused is described as accepting responsibility for his actions. However, he then goes on to minimize the offences. In relation to the threats uttered to his former spouse to kill her boyfriend, he said it had been “an empty threat”. As noted in the decision convicting the accused, there were some 19 threats, many of them graphic and chilling in nature. Range of sentence for threatening to kill a person
       
When prosecuted summarily, the offence of uttering a death threat has a maximum statutory sentence of a fine of not more than $5,000 or to a term of imprisonment of not more than two years less a day, or to both. See Criminal Code ss. 264.1 and 787. The usual range of sentence for the offence found in the jurisprudence is more modest.
       
In Crocker, Goodridge C.J.N., said that “Sentences for threats to cause bodily harm range up to one year; although frequently it has been ordered that the sentence be served concurrently with sentences imposed for other crimes committed in conjunction with the threat.” The cases do not draw any appreciable difference between death threats or threats to cause bodily harm, and the sentences are usually significantly less than the one year sentences mentioned in Crocker.
       
In R. v. Lyver, 2010 CanLII 11910 (NL PC), at para 41, Judge Gorman reviewed sentences for uttering threats, as follows:
 For the offence of uttering threats, not involving an intimate relationship, the range of sentence extends from a conditional discharge (see R. v. L.H.B. (2006), 2006 NLTD 87 (CanLII), 257 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 307 (N.L.S.C.)) to three years imprisonment (see R. v. Janes (1999), 1999 CanLII 18925 (NL CA), 170 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 269 (N.L.C.A.)). Periods of imprisonment of fourteen days (see R. v. Lewis (2002), 2002 CanLII 54024 (NL SC), 212 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 145 (N.L.S.C.)); one month (see R. v. H.P. (1995), 1995 CanLII 9875 (NL CA), 133 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 20 (N.L.C.A.) and R. v. Ryan (2006), 2006 NLTD 167 (CanLII), 261 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 326 (N.L.S.C.)); two months (see R. v. Sheppard (2003), 2003 NLCA 2 (CanLII), 220 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 299 (N.L.C.A.); R. v. Savchenko (2000), 2000 CanLII 28797 (NL SC), 191 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 225 (N.L.S.C.) and R. v. Stacey, [2010] N.J. No. 55 (P.C.)); three months (see R. v. Cormier (2005), 2005 NLTD 35 (CanLII), 245 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 271 (N.L.S.C.); R. v. Rowbottom, [2006] N.J. No. 31 (P.C.) and R. v. Eveleigh, [2007] N.J. No. 411 (P.C.)); four months (see R. v. Pumphrey (1995), 1995 CanLII 9834 (NL CA), 127 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 286 (N.L.C.A.)); and six months (see R. v. J.R.B., [2004] N.J. No. 101 (P.C.) and R. v. Hunt (2007), 2007 NLTD 204 (CanLII), 273 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 308 (N.L.S.C.)) have been imposed.
       
It must be noted that the foregoing range, from discharge to six months, refers to cases where a threat was made between parties who were not involved in an intimate relationship. Uttering a threat to an intimate partner is, as indicated earlier, a more serious matter. In R. v Young, 2020 CanLII 76213 (NL PC), the accused had threatened to burn down his former girlfriend’s home. He had committed other offences, and so totality operated to reduce the overall sentence imposed. For the threat offence, a sentence of 60 days was ordered. A similar sentence is appropriate for the offence here as well. Range of sentence for assault
       
The accused assaulted his former spouse and her boyfriend. At trial he denied having assaulted anyone, but admitted to taking his former spouse under the arms and lifting her off the ground in an effort to get her away from the car, where she was trying to collect her children.
       
In the presentence report, at page 8, the accused claimed that he had “attempted to defend himself”. This is different from his evidence at trial, where he described their ineffectual efforts to choke him. There was no air of reality to his claim, then or now, that he was defending himself. On the contrary, he was angry, and assaulted the mother of his children and her boyfriend.
       
In R. v Young, 2019 CanLII 5831 (NL PC), from paras 43 to 54, Judge Gorman did an extensive review of the sentencing jurisprudence for assault of an intimate partner, or former intimate partner. It appears from the review that the range of sentence is from a discharge to a term of imprisonment of six months.
       
For the assault of his former spouse, the accused should be sentenced to 60 days in custody. For the assault of her then boyfriend, which he committed after the man had refused to stop video recording him, he should be sentenced to 30 days in custody. Range of sentence for breach of non-contact bail order
       
Breach of bail conditions are a constant matter on the Provincial Court docket throughout the Province. The Court of Appeal has recognized that: see R. v O'Quinn, 2017 NLCA 10 (CanLII), at para 30, citing R. v. Murphy, 2011 NLCA 16, 304 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 266 at paras. 27-28. The Court of Appeal said in those decisions that sentences for breaches of court orders should ordinarily be consecutive to the sentences for the offences that gave rise to the breaches, and that the range of sentence is generally from one to three months imprisonment, or up to six months where the Crown proceeds by way of indictment. 
       
The accused had been placed on bail, with a non-contact provision. It restricted communication with his former common law spouse to third party arrangements. He breached that non-contact provision by contacting her. At page 8 of the presentence report, we read the following: In relation to the charge of failure to comply with a condition of a court order, Mr. Gover admitted that he had contacted  [name of complainant] directly after attempts to make contact through their agreed upon third party were unsuccessful.
       
It appears from this that the accused is attempting to minimize, or even justify, his breach of the bail condition. When men breach non-contact conditions, they are communicating to their former spouses that the victims are powerless, and that the Court order is meaningless. This is why breach of a non-contact bail condition is so much more serious than a breach for being out after curfew.
       
Given the seriousness of the non-contact breach, a sentence of 60 days is appropriate for the offence. Totality & Remand Credit
       
Before making any adjustment of the total sentence, the individual sentences are as follows:
          Offence                                                       Sentence
          Uttering threats                                           60 days
          Assault of former spouse                             60 days
          Assault of former spouse’s boyfriend           30 days
          Breach of noncontact bail condition             60 days
          Total sentence before adjustment                210 days
       
The accused committed three separate criminal adventures, in March, in May, and in August, 2022. Subject to totality, the sentences for the three separate dates should be made consecutive. It is arguable that the sentences for the two assaults committed on May 7, 2022, should receive consecutive sentences. This would avoid the appearance that the accused received no real penalty for knocking the phone out of the man’s hand and then putting him in a headlock. However, in the context of the totality principle, the sentence for that assault can be made concurrent. This reduces the total sentence to 180 days, less remand credit.
       
S. 719(3.1) of the Criminal Code sets a statutory maximum of credit one and one-half days for each day spent in custody. S. 719(3.2) requires that the court shall give reasons for any credit granted and shall cause those reasons to be stated in the record. The parties agree that the accused should receive remand credit at the rate of one and one-half days for each day spent in custody.
       
S. 719(3.3) of the Criminal Code provides as follows: The court shall cause to be stated in the record and on the warrant of committal the offence, the amount of time spent in custody, the term of imprisonment that would have been imposed before any credit was granted, the amount of time credited, if any, and the sentence imposed.
       
The accused was remanded into custody on November 29, 2022. He has now been in custody for 52 days. The parties agree that he is entitled to credit of 1.5 days for each day spent on remand awaiting sentencing. This results in a credit of 78 days. 
       
Pursuant to s. 719(3.3), this results in the following: Offence       time in custody               sentence                credit          net sentence Uttering threat      30 days                 60 days                 45 days       15 days       
Assault former spouse    20 days       60 days                  30 days      30 days       
Assault her boyfriend     n/a              30 days concurrent    zero         n/a Breach noncontact bail    2 days         60 days                 3 days         58 days Net sentence                   52 days       180 days               78 days       103 days               
       
I have reduced the 58 days for the breach of bail condition to 57 days to make the net result of 102 days left to serve: 180 -78 = 102. Where should the sentence be served?
       
Given the violent nature of the offences, and the breach of the bail condition, it would be inappropriate to sentence the accused to a community based sentence: s. 742.1(a) of the Criminal Code requires that the court be satisfied that the service of the sentence in the community would not endanger the safety of the community and would be consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing set out in sections 718 to 718.2. I am not satisfied as to either prerequisite has been met here. As a result, the sentence will be served in an institution. Ancillary orders
       
There are a number of ancillary orders, including probation, DNA, and a firearms prohibition. I will deal with the firearms prohibition order first, because s. 731.1(1) of the Criminal Code requires it: 
Before making a probation order, the court shall consider whether section 109 or 110 is applicable.
       
S. 110(1) of the Criminal Code provides that where a person is convicted of an offence in the commission of which violence against a person was used, threatened or attempted, the court that sentences the person or directs that the person be discharged, as the case may be, shall, in addition to any other punishment that may be imposed for that offence or any other condition prescribed in the order of discharge, consider whether it is desirable, in the interests of the safety of the person or of any other person, to make an order prohibiting the person from possessing any firearm, cross-bow, prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition or explosive substance, or all such things, and where the court decides that it is so desirable, the court shall so order.
       
The level of violence inherent in the offences of uttering threats and assaults committed here raise a very serious concern about access to firearms or ammunition. The actions of the accused have left the victims traumatised and suffering from anxiety, as the victim impact statements provide. The accused is prohibited from the possession of any firearm, cross-bow, prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition or explosive substance.
       
The usual firearms prohibition is no more than ten years, as set out in s. 110(2) of the Criminal Code. However, there is an exception in s. 110(2.1), as follows: Despite subsection (2), an order made under subsection (1) may be imposed for life or for any shorter duration if, in the commission of the offence, violence was used, threatened or attempted against (a) the person’s intimate partner; (b) a child or parent of the person or of anyone referred to in paragraph (a); or (c) any person who resides with the person or with anyone referred to in paragraph (a) or (b).
       
The prohibition order in this case will be for 16 years, by which time the youngest child will be of the age of majority.
       
A probation order will issue, for two years following the release of the accused from custody. The probation order conditions are as follows: 1)   
keep the peace and be of good behaviour[1]; 2)   
appear before the court when required to do so by the court; 3)   
notify the court or the probation officer in advance of any change of name or address, and promptly notify the court or the probation officer of any change of employment or occupation; 4)   
report to a probation officer within two working days of release from custody, and thereafter when required by the probation officer and in the manner directed by the probation officer; 5)   
attend counselling as directed by the probation officer, including, but not limited to, counselling for mental health issues, anger management, self control, and respectful relations; 6)   
abstain from communicating, directly or indirectly, with Shane Baker; 7)   
Have no contact with the victim except in compliance with a court order, through the offices of Family Justice Services, the department of Children, Seniors and Social Development or through a mutually acceptable third party; 8)   
Not to possess any knife with a blade longer than three inches, and then only for the purposes of preparing food or eating it; and 9)   
The accused is specifically prohibited from the possession of any axe, hatchet, machete, or other bladed tool or weapon with a cutting edge longer than two inches.
       
Uttering threats and assaults are secondary designated offences. DNA can identify an offender, and it can exonerate a person who is falsely accused of committing an offence. These offences, committed over the span of several months, were the first offences committed by the accused. Taking the DNA samples will be minimally invasive on the privacy and security of the accused.
       
Given the nature of these offences, including threats to leave the blood of one victim on the porch of the residence of the other victim, it is appropriate to order that the accused provide such samples of bodily substances as may be required to enter his DNA into the national databank.
       
Given his incarceration, the accused will not have to pay the victim surcharges which would otherwise apply. CONCLUSION
       
A sentence of 180 days, less credit for time on remand, is appropriate. The accused is sentenced to a net sentence of 102 days, followed by probation for two years, a firearms, ammunition, and explosives prohibition order for 16 years, and an order for the collection of DNA material.
