./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/ca/2023bcca19.html

David Campbell was charged with sexual assault and sexual interference against J.J., his best friend’s daughter. The charges related to a massage Mr. Campbell performed on J.J. about two decades ago, when she was a child. Mr. Campbell admitted that he once performed a massage on J.J., but described the incident differently than she did and claimed it happened after her 14th birthday. Following a three-day trial, Justice Brundrett rejected Mr. Campbell’s testimony on the timing and circumstances of the massage and accepted J.J.’s account, including her testimony that it happened when she was between 9 and 11 years old. 

The judge had a reasonable doubt as to whether Mr. Campbell touched J.J. for a subjectively sexual purpose when he massaged her as she described in her testimony. As a result, he acquitted Mr. Campbell on the sexual interference charge. However, he was satisfied that from any objective point of view the massage was committed in circumstances of a sexual nature. Given J.J.’s age at the time, he was also satisfied that the defence of consent did not apply to this case. Accordingly, he convicted Mr. Campbell of the sexual assault charge.

Mr. Campbell appeals from the sexual assault conviction. He submits the judge erred by reaching a conclusion on the sexual interference charge that was inconsistent with the conviction on the sexual assault charge. He also submits the judge erred by applying different standards of scrutiny as between his evidence and J.J.’s evidence, and by misapprehending the evidence related to adverse findings on his credibility. In consequence, Mr. Campbell says, we should allow the appeal, set aside the conviction and order a new trial.

In my view, the judge made no errors in his careful and nuanced analysis. For that reason and those that follow, I would dismiss the appeal.

Background

J.J. was born in Australia in 1987. In 1992, she moved with her parents and sisters to British Columbia, where they lived together until her parents separated in May 1999. J.J. was 11 years old at the time of the separation.

Between September 1996 and May 1999, J.J. and her family lived in a house on Upland Drive in Tsawwassen, B.C. After her parents separated, J.J.’s mother, K.A., and father, P.J., co-parented J.J. and her sisters in their respective homes. 

When J.J. was 14 or 15 years old, P.J. moved into a house on Tsawwassen Beach Road. From that point forward, she stayed at the Tsawwassen Beach Road house when she was in his care.

Mr. Campbell was a close friend of J.J.’s family. He was a musician and J.J. idolized him. At trial, she testified that he was like an uncle to her and she spent a lot of time with him.

At Trial

The Crown called two witnesses at trial, J.J. and her mother, K.A. Mr. Campbell testified on his own behalf.

J.J. described the massage incident in detail in her testimony. She said the incident occurred one evening at the Upland Drive house before her parents separated in 1999. J.J. thought Mr. Campbell was babysitting her at the time because he was putting her to bed in her parents’ bed when it happened. She could not remember who else was in the house, but said only she and Mr. Campbell were in the bedroom.

According to J.J., she was on her mother’s side of the bed, the lights were off and a lamp was on. She was wearing one of her father’s T-shirts but nothing else when the incident happened. She testified that Mr. Campbell asked if she wanted a back massage. She agreed, and he started to massage her back and shoulders over her T-shirt. However, a few minutes later he playfully suggested that the best way to give a back massage was to do the top and bottom at the same time. She agreed to this suggestion and, at Mr. Campbell’s instruction, positioned herself on all fours on her parents’ bed.

J.J. testified that when she was positioned on all fours her uncovered genitalia were exposed to Mr. Campbell, who was kneeling behind her. At that point, he began to massage her under her T-shirt. He rubbed her chest and stomach area with one hand by reaching under her body and between her legs. He rubbed her back with the other hand on top of her body. Within a few minutes, she began to feel uncomfortable and confused by what was happening. As a result, she told Mr. Campbell she wanted to go to sleep and he stopped the massage.

On cross-examination, J.J. testified that she first disclosed the massage incident to her sister in 2008. In 2017, she told the police. When defence counsel put it to her that Mr. Campbell gave her a massage at the Tsawwassen Beach Road house when she was about 14 years old after she modelled bathing suits for an upcoming trip to Australia, J.J. was adamant that no such incident occurred. 

The other Crown witness, K.A., confirmed the relevant timelines and locations at which she, P.J. and their children lived after they moved to Canada. She also acknowledged that she had previously stated she would not have allowed Mr. Campbell to babysit her children based on her concerns about his questionable morals and boundaries. However, K.A. testified that, on reflection, she had come to believe she might have allowed him to babysit the children. She explained the change in this regard on the basis that it had previously been too painful for her to accept she might have failed J.J.

For his part, Mr. Campbell acknowledged that he massaged J.J. on one occasion. However, he stated, the massage happened at the Tsawwassen Beach Road house when J.J. was 14 or 15 years old, not at the Upland Drive house before her parents’ separation in 1999. In particular, he testified, the incident began on the deck of the Tsawwassen Beach Road house when J.J. modelled swimsuits she was planning to take on a trip to Australia and asked for his opinion on which she should bring with her. It was in that context, he said, that J.J. told him her back had been bothering her and asked for or agreed to a back rub.

Mr. Campbell testified that it was hot and dirty on the deck so they went inside the house, where he began to rub J.J.’s back, neck and shoulders. He went on to say that shortly after he began the massage he asked if J.J. wanted to try another style of massage, “like an energy transfer thing” that he had learned from “alternative friends”. J.J. agreed and got onto all fours. He positioned himself at her side, and he reached around “like a wrestling move between her legs”, closer to her left thigh. Then, he said, he briefly massaged J.J.’s back and stomach.

According to Mr. Campbell, the massage lasted a minute or two. However, he testified, he quickly realised “maybe this isn’t the best idea” and gave J.J. a “scrunchie” on her back and stomach in an effort to “keep it fun”. He described the massage as “a bit of an awkward moment” and stated that it was “getting inappropriate” because J.J.’s vagina “was right there”. He stated further that it was “bordering with sexual” and that it occurred to him if J.J.’s father walked in he would not appreciate it. As a result, he said, the massage stopped and they both had a chuckle.

On cross-examination, Mr. Campbell denied that he ever gave J.J. a massage at the Upland Drive house. He also denied that he was ever alone with J.J. in her parents’ bedroom, that he massaged her when she was wearing a long T-shirt and no underwear, or that he massaged her for a sexual purpose. Although he acknowledged the massage he described was inappropriate, Mr. Campbell maintained that he was “a little naïve” about it at first so it took a while for it to dawn on him. He stated that he had friends do the same type of massage on him before and he had done it for friends, which is why he thought at first that it was a good thing.

In closing submissions, Crown counsel argued that Mr. Campbell’s version of events was not credible. For example, he submitted, Mr. Campbell’s testimony that he reached between J.J.’s legs made no sense given that he said he was positioned at her side and thus had direct access to her stomach. He also emphasised the detailed quality of J.J.’s account.

For his part, defence counsel acknowledged that J.J. was a credible witness in his closing submissions. However, he argued her evidence was not reliable, especially as to the timing of the massage incident. He also argued that Mr. Campbell’s version of events was no less credible and perhaps more reliable than J.J.’s version, and stated there was no basis to reject Mr. Campbell’s evidence and accept the evidence of J.J.

Reasons for Judgment

The judge began by summarising the charges and highlighting the significance of the date of the alleged incident, namely, that if it happened after J.J.’s 14th birthday her consent would not be automatically vitiated by operation of s. 150.1 of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46. He identified the main issues as the credibility and reliability of J.J. and Mr. Campbell, and whether the Crown had proven its case on the whole of the evidence beyond a reasonable doubt.

The judge reviewed the background facts, J.J.’s version of events, and Mr. Campbell’s version of events. As to the latter, he commented that Mr. Campbell largely agreed with J.J. “as to the massage incident itself”, but that his description of “the massage, the context, the date, and events leading up to it” was “markedly different”. Then he outlined Mr. Campbell’s version, noted that J.J. adamantly denied its contradictory details, and summarised K.A.’s evidence, which he accepted. In doing so, he found that K.A.’s evidence did not “foreclose the possibility of the accused having the opportunity to commit the offence”.

Next, the judge set out the legal requirements of the offences, the assessment of credibility, and the evidence of adults testifying about childhood events. Turning to the application of those principles, he began by assessing the evidence of J.J. He observed that J.J. testified in a forthright manner and appeared to be “a careful witness with a sombre demeanour who was attempting to recall events as best she could”. Among other things, he also stated her evidence was internally consistent and her narrative of the event was plausible. After noting the circumstances of her disclosure to her sister in 2008, he commented that he did not take anything from its delayed nature. He concluded this portion of his analysis by noting that “[t]he lack of confirmatory evidence as to the inculpatory aspects of the event makes the assessment of credibility more critical”.

The judge went on to assess the evidence of Mr. Campbell. As with J.J., he found nothing in Mr. Campbell’s demeanour that “told against his credibility”. He described Mr. Campbell’s narrative as “superficially believable”, internally consistent and substantially in accordance with his police statement. However, he stated, there were “troubling aspects” to Mr. Campbell’s version of events.

The judge provided a detailed explanation of the aspects of Mr. Campbell’s narrative that he found troubling:

… the accused did not offer an explanation for why a 14 or 15-year-old would complain of a sore back in the middle of showing him her swimsuits. While this gives me pause, and I find it to be improbable, it is certainly not fatal to his credibility. People behave in odd ways at times … I would caution myself against making stereotypical assumptions about human behaviour: R. v. Kodwat, 2017 YKCA 11 at paras. 36–41.

More troublesome is the accused’s explanation that he simultaneously rubbed the complainant’s stomach and back area performing a “healing” or “energy transfer” type massage in order to alleviate her sore back. If he was truly giving her a massage, as he stated, it was unclear why it was necessary to have the complainant go up on all fours to perform the technique rather than merely inserting one hand beneath her stomach as she lay prone on the floor or couch, or perhaps having her elevate her stomach slightly.
Moreover, from a commonsense perspective, a stomach massage would seem to target the abdominal muscles, not the back. The therapeutic benefits of his supposed energy transfer technique seem questionable …

The basis for the energy transfer procedure was not well-explained in his testimony other than that he had learned the technique from adult “alternative” friends. In cross-examination, he referred to it as an “energy transfer thing.” His use of this language indicated that he was not well-versed in the method. The accused would have known he was in a trusted relationship with the family. It seems puzzling for him to place his close friend’s pubescent daughter on all fours in such a vulnerable position, while they were alone together and while she was wearing a bathing suit, simply in order to be able to rub her stomach in addition to her back.

By the same token, on his narrative it was completely unnecessary for the accused to reach between the complainant’s legs, yet he admitted that he did so by reaching into her legs close to her left thigh …. His explanation that the act of reaching through the complainant’s legs was in furtherance of some form of massage did not make sense and struck me as illogical.
 
Next, the accused testified that he realized after he reached through the complainant’s legs and rubbed her stomach area that his behaviour could be construed as inappropriate, and he disengaged. This professed belated realization of the inappropriateness of the situation does not strike me as credible… 
 
… I found the accused’s descriptions both at trial and his statement to police to amount to a denial of the obvious point that he should have been alert to the objective impropriety of the situation far earlier than the point wherein he executed his energy transfer technique. The accused’s repeated implausible explanations of his thinking and behaviour left the impression that he was attempting to minimize the more incriminatory aspects of the event.
 

The judge also commented on J.J.’s astonishment and adamant denial when Mr. Campbell’s account was put to her on cross-examination. He found she was “not forgetful or mistaken on this point”. Accordingly, he did not believe Mr. Campbell’s version of events:
 
None of these difficulties are fatal to the accused’s credibility in themselves. However, measuring the plausibility of the accused’s narrative in the context of the surrounding circumstances, I find that there are several improbable aspects to his explanation of the massage incident that undermine his version of events. I would be careful to avoid stereotypical reasoning and speculation regarding human behaviour on the part of either the accused or the complainant. However, having done so, the accused’s narrative does not accord with common sense, what is reliably known about the relationship between the accused and the complainant, and the probabilities inherent in the events the accused described.
 
As a result, I do not believe the evidence of the accused about the events preceding the massage, or the timing, the specific location, or the incriminating aspects of the massage.
 
 The final steps in the judge’s analysis were deciding whether the required intent had been made out on each count and assessing the whole of the evidence. As to the former, he found the massage incident unfolded as J.J. described and he was satisfied on an objective level beyond a reasonable doubt that the sexual context of the assault was readily visible to a reasonable observer. However, given the short duration of the touching and the absence of any overt indication of sexual gratification or sexualized words, the judge declined to ascribe a subjectively sexual purpose to Mr. Campbell. As the offence of sexual interference requires a subjective intent to touch for a sexual purpose, he acquitted Mr. Campbell on count 1, the sexual interference charge.
 

In acquitting Mr. Campbell, the judge said this:
 
With respect to count 1, the count of sexual interference, I have more difficulty in finding that the touching was subjectively for a sexual purpose. Although highly suspicious, especially in light of his attempt at trial to describe the incident in a more favourable light, the touching was of relatively short duration, there was no overt indication of sexual gratification, and no sexualized words accompanied the act. Despite the areas of the body touched, and the act of reaching through the complainant’s legs, I have difficulty in ascribing a sexual motive to the accused on the criminal standard of proof so as to ground a subjective intent to touch for a sexual purpose.
 
Despite what I said above in rejecting the accused’s narrative, on the whole of the evidence I am left with a reasonable doubt as to whether the incident, which was sexualized from any objective point of view, occurred during a lapse of judgment in relation to the accused’s very misguided massage technique. I am compelled to find, therefore, that the circumstances raise a reasonable doubt as to whether the touching the accused engaged in was done for a subjectively sexual purpose, and I would acquit him of sexual interference on count 1.
 

Although the judge acquitted Mr. Campbell on count 1, he convicted him on count 2, the sexual assault charge. He reached this conclusion based on the essential elements of the offence and the whole of the evidence:
 
I believe the evidence of the complainant. Her credibility was not seriously challenged. I cannot find a basis for finding that she had a mistaken memory. I found her narrative of events to be plausible, coherent, and reliable. I accept the complainant’s evidence that the accused engaged in a single incident of massaging her under her clothing as she described. I find as a fact that the incident occurred while she was living at the house on Upland Drive in Delta between September 1996 and January 1, 1999, when the complainant was between the ages of 9 and 11 years of age.
 
I do not believe the evidence of the accused on the critical aspects of the massage incident. His description of the context of the key massage event appeared to me to be strained and contrived in order to explain away the more incriminating aspects of the complainant’s narrative, such as why he was touching the complainant, why she was partially clothed, and why he reached through her legs. I also find that the accused deliberately lied about the date of the massage incident in order to cast himself in a better light and perhaps to attempt to pinpoint the date of the offence at a date where the complainant was sufficiently advanced in age to nominally consent to the behaviour in question.
 
The evidence of the accused does not leave me with a reasonable doubt. Nor, after careful consideration of all the evidence, am I unable to decide whom to believe.
 
Having regard to the whole of the evidence, including the evidence of the complainant, her mother K.A., and the evidence of the accused that I do accept, I am not left with a reasonable doubt on count 2. In coming to this conclusion, I repeat my finding that the evidence of K.A. did not foreclose the opportunity of the accused being left alone with the complainant one evening with the opportunity to commit a sexual assault. 

On Appeal
 
Mr. Campbell raises three grounds of appeal from the sexual assault conviction. First, and foremost, Mr. Campbell contends the judge erred by reaching a conclusion on the sexual interference charge that was inconsistent with the conviction on the sexual assault charge. Second, he contends the judge erred by taking an unbalanced approach to analysing his evidence, on the one hand, and J.J.’s evidence, on the other. Third, he contends the judge erred by misapprehending certain evidence related to his credibility.

Discussion 

Did the judge err by reaching a conclusion on the sexual interference charge that was inconsistent with the conviction on the sexual assault charge? 
 
Mr. Campbell contends the judge engaged in improper reasoning in analysing the evidence, which resulted in inconsistent verdicts. In advancing this contention, he concedes it is theoretically possible for a court to acquit on a sexual interference charge but convict on a sexual assault charge given that sexual interference is a specific intent offence. However, he says, the judge assessed the same evidence in this case in differing ways that were also incompatible. In his submission, this led him to reach an unsupportable verdict of guilt on the sexual assault charge. 
 
In support of his submission, Mr. Campbell notes the judge described the issues related to his simultaneous rubbing of J.J.’s stomach and back as “troublesome”. However, he emphasises, both he and J.J. testified that he suggested the technique and there was no substantive dispute between them on the general mechanics of the massage. Importantly, he says, the judge was unable to conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that he subjectively had a sexual purpose based on this undisputed evidence, despite reaching his negative credibility finding based on the same evidence. Mr. Campbell contends that the negative credibility finding undermined his ability to argue that his version of events raised a reasonable doubt with respect to the sexual assault charge because J.J. was over 14 years old when the massage took place and so may have consented to the massage. 
 
Mr. Campbell goes on to argue that the judge’s concerns regarding his credibility plainly related to whether his explanations of his motivation for the massage were plausible. In his submission, given that the judge found his explanations amounted to implausible attempts “to minimize the more incriminatory aspects of the event”, it is difficult, if not impossible, to see how the same implausible explanations could leave him with a reasonable doubt on the sexual interference charge but not on the sexual assault charge. Accordingly, he argues, the differing verdicts were inconsistent and the guilty verdict was based on flawed reasoning. More specifically, Mr. Campbell says the judge’s justification for his negative credibility assessment and lack of reasonable doubt on the sexual assault charge was inconsistent with his reasonable doubt on the sexual purpose issue. 
 
In other words, Mr. Campbell contends the judge’s reasoning and findings, considered as a whole, did not and could not support different verdicts on the two charges. If his “implausible” testimony was believable enough to raise a reasonable doubt on the sexual interference charge, he says that it should also have been believable enough to raise a reasonable doubt on the sexual assault charge on the basis that J.J. was 14 years old when the massage took place and so may have consented to it. 
 
In addition, Mr. Campbell argues, there was nothing particularly implausible about his version of events and neither his version nor J.J.’s version was more plausible. Further, he says, the Crown did not cross-examine him meaningfully on issues such as the therapeutic benefits of a stomach massage or why J.J. was positioned on all fours, but the judge focused on those issues in reaching his negative credibility assessment. Moreover, Mr. Campbell explains, the negative credibility assessment was grounded in part in his failure to explain J.J.’s motivation for complaining of a sore back, which he characterises as an additional error that contributed to the judge’s lack of reasonable doubt.
 
I do not accept these submissions. In my view, the judge’s reasoning in convicting Mr. Campbell on the sexual assault charge was not illogical in light of his reasoning in acquitting him on the sexual interference charge. Nor were the conviction, on the one hand, and the acquittal, on the other, inconsistent or irreconcilable on the evidence.
 
Appellate courts engage in a functional and contextual analysis of reasons for judgment. In doing so, they accord significant deference to credibility findings and factual assessments made by trial judges, bearing in mind the distinct advantages trial judges enjoy in those realms. Where there is a reasonable basis for a trial judge’s factual findings and inferences, an appellate court will not substitute its own view of the evidence. On the contrary, a trial judge’s evaluation of the evidence will only be disturbed on appeal where a palpable and overriding error has be shown: R v. G.F., 2021 SCC 20 at para. 5; R. v. M.D., 2021 BCCA 339 at para. 54; R. v. Clark, 2005 SCC 2 at para. 9.
 
An appellate court will overturn a guilty verdict if it was reached illogically or irrationally. This may occur if the judge finds a fact or draws an inference essential to the verdict that is plainly contradicted by the evidence relied on in support or is demonstrably incompatible with evidence that was not otherwise contradicted or rejected by the judge. A guilty verdict may also be overturned on the basis that it is inconsistent with a not guilty verdict on another charge. If the two verdicts are irreconcilable such that no reasonable trier-of-fact, properly instructed, could possibly have rendered them on the evidence, the guilty verdict will be set aside as unreasonable: R. v. Beaudry, 2007 SCC 5 at para. 98; R. v. Sinclair, 2011 SCC 40 at paras. 4, 15–21; R. v. Pittiman, 2006 SCC 9 at para. 6; R. v. R.V., 2021 SCC 10 at paras. 28–31.
 
In this case, the judge did not reach either verdict based on illogical reasoning. On the contrary, his reasoning was careful and nuanced. Nor were the verdicts based on contradictory evidence, inconsistent or irreconcilable. 
 
As the judge explained, sexual interference is a specific intent offence requiring proof beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused touched the complainant for a sexual purpose. Sexual assault, on the other hand, is a general intent offence. A sexual assault is a non-consensual intentional application of force committed in circumstances of a sexual nature. The test is objective. It asks whether, viewed in light of all the circumstances, the sexual or carnal context of the assault is visible to a reasonable observer: ss. 151, 265, Criminal Code; R. v. T.L.P., 2015 BCSC 618 at paras. 12–18; R. v. Chase, 1987 CanLII 23 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 293 at 302.
 
At the relevant time, consent was not an available defence to a charge of either sexual interference or sexual assault where the complainant was younger than 14: s. 150.1, Criminal Code.
 
The judge assessed Mr. Campbell’s credibility based on the entire body of salient evidence. This included his manifestly implausible narrative of the circumstances surrounding the massage, how it unfolded and why he massaged J.J. in the way that he did. The judge concluded that Mr. Campbell’s narrative did not accord with common sense, what was reliably known about his relationship with J.J., and the probabilities inherent in the events as Mr. Campbell described them. As a result, he did not believe his testimony “about the events preceding the massage, or the timing, the specific location, or the incriminating aspects of the massage”. He also found the incident unfolded as J.J. described in her testimony, including when and where it happened, and its sexual context was readily visible on an objective level. The judge’s credibility assessments and factual findings on these issues are consistent with respect to both counts and entitled to appellate deference.
 
Based on his factual findings and negative credibility assessment, it was clearly open to the judge to infer further that Mr. Campbell touched J.J. for a sexual purpose when he massaged her. However, he was not obliged to do so as a matter of logic or law. Rather, in light of the criminal standard of proof applicable to Mr. Campbell’s subjective intent, and despite rejecting his narrative and harbouring high suspicion, the judge was left with a reasonable doubt regarding his intent raised by the surrounding circumstances, namely, the short duration of the touching and the absence of any overt indication of sexual gratification or sexualized words. For this reason, he acquitted Mr. Campbell on the sexual interference charge. Given that the sexual assault charge did not require proof of subjective intent, there was no legal, logical or evidentiary inconsistency between that acquittal and the conviction for sexual assault.
 
I would not give effect to this ground of appeal.

Did the judge err by taking an unbalanced approach to analysing Mr. Campbell’s evidence and J.J.’s evidence?
 
Mr. Campbell also contends the judge’s credibility findings were unfairly skewed in the Crown’s favour. In particular, he says, the judge assessed his credibility negatively based on improper speculation regarding his possible motive to lie and failed to appreciate that his account was significantly corroborated by the evidence of J.J. In doing so, he submits, the judge applied a different standard in assessing his credibility than he applied in assessing J.J.’s credibility.
 
On the first point, Mr. Campbell submits the judge engaged in improper speculation in finding that he knew the age of consent at the time of the massage and deliberately lied about the date of the massage. However, he says, there was insufficient evidence to support such a finding, which could not properly be used to undermine his overall credibility. On the second point, Mr. Campbell submits the judge failed to give sufficient weight to J.J.’s evidence that she went on a trip to Australia with her father when she was between the ages of 14 and 16, which he contends corroborated his version of events and weighed in favour of his credibility. 
 
I am not persuaded by these submissions. 
 
In R. v. Roth, 2020 BCCA 240, this Court stated that it is an error of law for a judge to subject the evidence of the defence to more rigorous scrutiny than the evidence of the Crown: at para. 47. Notably, however, in G.F. Justice Karakatsanis questioned whether “uneven scrutiny” is a helpful ground of appeal. Several Courts have recently observed that “uneven scrutiny” is a notoriously difficult ground to make out, its value as an analytical tool to demonstrate error in a judge’s reasoning process on credibility findings is doubtful, and, if it exists, it may not amount to an independent ground of appeal: G.F. at paras. 99–101; R. v. Mehari, 2020 SKCA 37 at para. 31; R. v. S.S., 2022 BCCA 392 at paras. 72–75. As Justice MacKenzie explained in S.S., Roth does not stand for the simple proposition that “uneven scrutiny” is a free-standing ground of appeal, nor did the Court treat it as such in Roth. Rather, the conclusion in Roth was that the judge’s credibility assessment of the accused was tainted by three distinct and readily identifiable errors in principle: Roth at para. 54; S.S. at paras. 73–74. 
 
In G.F., Justice Karakatsanis emphasised that “the focus must always be on whether there is reversible error in the trial judge’s credibility findings”: at para. 100. It is a reversible error of law for a judge to find facts or assess credibility based on speculative reasoning. Factual findings and credibility assessments must be context-specific and grounded in the evidence, not based on conjecture or stereotypical behavioural generalisations. When judges find facts and draw inferences, they must not rely on stereotypes or assumptions about what a person might normally do in a situation. Rather, they must engage with the case-specific evidence: R. v. R.K.K., 2022 BCCA 17 at para. 39; R. v. Conway, 2021 BCCA 460 at para. 44–45. 
 
In my view, the judge did not take an unbalanced approach to assessing Mr. Campbell’s credibility, on the one hand, and J.J.’s credibility, on the other. Contrary to Mr. Campbell’s submission, he did not find that Mr. Campbell knew the age of consent at the time of the massage and, for that reason, lied about the date of the massage during his testimony. Rather, he found that Mr. Campbell lied about the date of the massage to cast himself in a better light, which finding was well-grounded in the evidence. While he also commented that perhaps Mr. Campbell attempted to pinpoint the date of the offence past J.J.’s 14th birthday so that she could “nominally consent to the behaviour in question”, as the Crown emphasises, he expressly refrained from drawing any speculative conclusion on the point. 
 
As to Mr. Campbell’s submission that the judge failed to give sufficient weight to J.J.’s evidence regarding the trip to Australia, I do not accept that it significantly corroborated his account in the sense that it made a material aspect of that account more probable. In addition, and in any event, the judge expressly noted J.J.’s testimony on the point, which he described as confirming “a fact that is relevant to the accused’s version of events”. The weight to be accorded this evidence was entirely within the purview of the judge.
 
I would not give effect to this ground of appeal. 

Did the judge err by misapprehending evidence related to Mr. Campbell’s credibility?
 
Finally, Mr. Campbell contends that the judge misapprehended the evidence regarding his failure to explain “why a 14 or 15-year-old would complain of a sore back in the middle of showing him her swimsuits”. In his submission, he was not asked to provide such an explanation and therefore an adverse inference or other negative credibility finding on this point was inappropriate and unfair. In addition, he says, Crown counsel did not argue this point in closing submissions and, given the importance of credibility, the judge should not have raised it on his own motion. Further, he argues, he could only testify as to his own observations and state of mind, and could not reasonably be expected to interpret J.J.’s motivations to validate his own version of events.
 
I see no error in the judge’s apprehension or treatment of the evidence on this point.
 
A misapprehension of evidence will warrant appellate intervention where the judge makes errors regarding the substance of material parts of the evidence and those errors play an essential part in the reasoning process that results in a conviction. A misapprehension of this kind may involve a failure to consider evidence relevant to a material issue, a mistake as to the substance of the evidence, or a failure to give proper effect to the evidence. Where there has been such a misapprehension, the appellant will not have received a fair trial and a miscarriage of justice will have occurred: R. v. Morrissey (1995), 1995 CanLII 3498 (ON CA), 97 C.C.C. (3d) 193 at 218, 221 (Ont. C.A.); R. v. Lohrer, 2004 SCC 80 at paras. 1–2; R. v. Osinde, 2021 BCCA 124 at paras. 17–18. 
 
The test for a misapprehension of evidence is stringent. The appellant must demonstrate the misapprehension went to substance, was material to the judge's reasoning process, and played an essential part in the reasoning process resulting in conviction. In deciding whether a material misapprehension resulted in a miscarriage of justice, an appellate court may ask whether the misapprehension, if removed, could plausibly have left the judge with a reasonable doubt. Differing interpretations of evidence do not amount to misapprehensions. The fact that a judge could have interpreted evidence differently does not mean that the judge misapprehended the evidence: Osinde at para. 20; R.K.K. at para. 52. 
 
The judge did not draw an adverse inference or assess Mr. Campbell’s credibility negatively because he offered no explanation for J.J.’s motivations in complaining of a sore back when modelling her swimsuits. On the contrary, he expressly cautioned himself against relying on any assumptions about why J.J. might have made such a complaint and commented that “[p]eople behave in odd ways at times”. Nothing in the reasons that follow suggests any improper reliance on this point, which the judge noted but then immediately neutralised.
 
I would not give effect to this ground of appeal.

Conclusion
 
For all of the foregoing reasons, I would dismiss the appeal.

./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/ca/2023bcca2.html

David Johnathan Michael Kehoe is Métis. On February 19, 2021, the trial judge convicted him of one count of aggravated assault contrary to s. 268(2) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 (“Code”). The judge found that he had stabbed the victim twice. The assault was unprovoked. The stab wounds punctured the victim’s lung and lacerated his liver. If not for surgery, the victim would have died. 

On November 19, 2021, the judge sentenced Mr. Kehoe to five years’ imprisonment less time served. He also made ancillary DNA and firearms orders. The judge’s reasons for sentence are indexed at 2021 BCSC 2474.

Mr. Kehoe seeks leave to appeal his sentence. He acknowledges that the judge referenced s. 718.2(e) of the Code and Gladue principles, but maintains he erred in principle by failing to give them meaningful effect. If successful on appeal, he seeks a sentence of three to four years’ imprisonment less time served.

The Crown argues that the judge appropriately accepted its position that Mr. Kehoe’s Indigenous status should be given little weight on the basis that the nexus between his status and the offence was limited. In the Crown’s submission, the dysfunction in Mr. Kehoe’s life was related mostly to his non-Indigenous step-father’s behaviours rather than to Gladue factors.

In my respectful view, the judge erred in principle by relying on trial Crown’s submission that Gladue principles played a limited role in Mr. Kehoe’s case because of his disconnection from his Métis heritage, culture and community. I would therefore grant Mr. Kehoe leave to appeal his sentence, allow his appeal and impose a sentence of four years’ imprisonment less time served. I would not set aside the ancillary orders made by the judge.

Circumstances of the Offence

The circumstances of the offence are summarized at paras. 8–15 of the judge’s reasons for sentence. I will repeat only the essential facts. 

On the evening of August 24, 2018, Mr. Kehoe drank four to five beers with friends by the river in Chilliwack. He returned to his apartment at approximately 11:35 p.m. Several minutes later, he heard three young men, including the victim, playing loud music in the parking lot. 

Mr. Kehoe yelled and then threw eggs at the young men from his balcony. When that did not deter them, Mr. Kehoe went down to the external door of his apartment building and confronted them. After some pushing and shoving the young men walked away.

Mr. Kehoe returned to his apartment, retrieved a large kitchen knife and followed the young men. As he approached them from behind, two of the young men retreated. The victim, who was quite intoxicated, stayed on the sidewalk. He raised his hands with his palms facing forward. He posed no threat to Mr. Kehoe. Without provocation, Mr. Kehoe stabbed him twice, once in his chest and once in his side.
 
Mr. Kehoe then proceeded towards the other two young men. They defended themselves and Mr. Kehoe ran back to his apartment.

The victim was taken to the hospital. The judge described his injuries and the surgeries that saved his life as follows:
 
... [The victim] suffered a traumatic right hemothorax (or punctured lung), a hemoperitoneum (or internal bleeding), a liver laceration, and leakage of injected medication into the surrounding tissue. He underwent surgery to repair the punctured lung and the lacerated liver. Without surgery, he would have died. He had a long course of recovery in hospital and after his release. 

Reasons for Sentence
 
The judge began his reasons for sentence by noting that the maximum sentence for aggravated assault is 14 years’ imprisonment. He then explained that the Crown sought five years’ imprisonment less time served while Mr. Kehoe sought three years’ imprisonment less time served. 
 
After summarizing the circumstances, the judge noted that no victim impact statement had been filed. He then set out the positions of the parties with respect to aggravating and mitigating circumstances. In response to Mr. Kehoe’s submission that he had taken responsibility for his actions, the judge commented that he had not done so until he was found guilty. 
 
With the benefit of pre-sentence, psychological and Gladue reports, the judge next reviewed Mr. Kehoe’s prior life experiences and criminal record.
 
At the time of sentencing, Mr. Kehoe was 30 years old. He had a troubled childhood. He was raised by his mother and step-father who lived a “partying” lifestyle. The family moved frequently following evictions due to Mr. Kehoe’s step-father operating marihuana grow operations. When he was about 12 years old, Mr. Kehoe began lying, stealing, bringing drugs into the home and perhaps taking drugs out of the home and selling them. He was tremendously negatively affected by the stabbing death of his step-brother in 2011.
 
Mr. Kehoe had been involved in three long-term relationships. He had three daughters under the age of five with three different women. He was subject to no-contact orders with respect to two of the mothers of his children.
 
The judge summarized Mr. Kehoe’s criminal record as follows:
 
The presentence report also sets out Mr. Kehoe’s prior criminal record. It indicates that he has a total of 33 prior convictions, both youth and adult, including six robbery‑related offences, four offences involving threatening, one weapons offence, and numerous breaches of court orders and conditional sentences, as well as parole violations.
 
The judge noted that the author of the psychological report considered Mr. Kehoe to pose a “moderate risk of future violence” and required special strategies to manage that risk.
 
The pre-sentence, psychological and Gladue reports all indicated that Mr. Kehoe intended to turn his life around. There was some evidence to suggest he could do so. He was qualified as an architectural sheet metal fabricator, was employable and had attended a second stage addiction recovery residence for nine months. He had been compliant with his recovery program but had relapsed in the summer of 2020 and March 2021.
 
Mr. Kehoe submitted that the long-term goal of protecting society would be best achieved through his rehabilitation. The judge commented that “inherent in that submission is an acknowledgment that an un-rehabilitated Mr. Kehoe is a danger to society.”
 
The judge next turned to s. 718.2(e) of the Code, which he noted requires judges to pay “particular attention to the circumstances of Aboriginal offenders” in the sentencing process. He also noted that Mr. Kehoe has Métis heritage on his mother’s side. 
 
Of particular importance to this appeal, the judge cited two passages from this Court’s decision in R. v. Hamer, 2021 BCCA 297, namely that: (1) for s. 718.2(e) to apply, an Indigenous offender need not establish a causal link between systemic and background factors and the offence at issue: Hamer at par. 98; and (2) there was no evidence in Mr. Hamer’s case to show that his claimed Indigenous heritage played any role in his criminality: Hamer at para. 114.

The judge summarized the positions of the parties and his own views regarding the impact of Mr. Kehoe’s Indigenous heritage as follows:
 
The Crown notes that none of the negative experiences in Mr. Kehoe’s youth were connected in any tangible way to his Indigenous heritage or the legacy of residential schools. The majority of the problems were occasioned by his stepfather’s lifestyle and connection to the drug trade. Further, Mr. Kehoe was not apprised of his Aboriginal heritage until recently.
 
In response, Mr. Kehoe’s counsel submits that the net should be cast more broadly. Simply put, Mr. Kehoe’s mother is of Aboriginal heritage. Women of that heritage have poor outcomes in our society. I accept that submission and that I should consider systemic and background factors that have played a role in bringing the Indigenous person before the court and may have a mitigating effect on moral blameworthiness. …
 
… [T]he Gladue report indicated many of the same unfortunate experiences from Mr. Kehoe’s youth as the presentence report and the psychological report. I have taken those factors into account, both as general background factors and factors to be considered under s. 718.2(e). I consider the nexus between Mr. Kehoe’s Aboriginal status and this offence to be limited.
 
The judge then recited the purpose and principles of sentencing in s. 718 of the Code. Mr. Kehoe did not dispute that denunciation, deterrence and protection of the public were the primary considerations.
 
Next, the judge cited this Court’s decision in R. v. Craig, 2005 BCCA 484 for the following propositions: the range of sentence for aggravated assault is between 16 months’ and six years’ imprisonment; unprovoked attacks with weapons belong at the higher end of this range; and consensual fights that escalate with resulting injury belong at the lower end: Craig at para. 10.

Mr. Kehoe relied on R. v. Billing, 2017 BCSC 1107. In that case, Justice DeWitt-Van Oosten (as she then was) imposed a sentence of three years’ imprisonment less time served on an Indigenous offender with a lengthy record who had been found guilty of stabbing the victim six times causing life-threatening injuries. The judge distinguished the case on the basis that Mr. Billing’s assault was not unprovoked. Rather, the victim had initiated an altercation and Mr. Billing responded with disproportionate force. The judge commented:
 
I accept the Crown’s submission that in sentencing there is a substantive differentiation between cases involving an unprovoked attack and cases involving an altercation that proceeds too far. There is a common-sense basis for this distinction. In my opinion, society views an unprovoked knife attack on an innocent victim to be one of the most violent and shocking offences in our society. That circumstance is significantly different than the injury to a willing combatant where the altercation goes too far.
 
Mr. Kehoe also relied on R. v. Sanghera, 2016 BCCA 251, in which this Court upheld a three-year jail sentence for an unprovoked aggravated assault. The judge distinguished the case on the basis that, unlike Mr. Kehoe, Mr. Sanghera had no criminal record and faced deportation as a result of his conviction and sentence.

Finally, the judge concluded that a five-year term of imprisonment was appropriate for Mr. Kehoe:
 
I do not accept the defence submission that the appropriate sentence in this case is three years less time served. As described in Craig, an unprovoked attack with a weapon tends to result in a sentence at the higher end of the range. That high end is up to six years. …
 
In my view, the public is best protected by imposing a sentence with the primary objectives being denunciation and deterrence of this offence. I accept the Crown’s submission on the appropriate length of sentence. I impose a sentence of five years’ imprisonment. Mr. Kehoe, you are entitled to credit for time in custody of 260 actual days at 1.5 days’ credit per day in custody.
 
In my opinion, this sentence is commensurate with Mr. Kehoe’s culpability, while also giving him an opportunity to focus on his own rehabilitation. I am also hopeful that Mr. Kehoe will engage in a meaningful way with the available Indigenous programs, thereby supporting his rehabilitation and reintegration into society. 

Standard of Review
 
Sentencing is a highly individualized process. Sentencing judges have “front‑line” experience, see and hear all the evidence and submissions in person, and are generally familiar with the circumstances and needs of the local community. As a result, sentencing judges have broad discretion to impose a fit sentence. Sentencing decisions are entitled to considerable deference and will only be overturned for good reason: R. v. Friesen, 2020 SCC 9 at para. 25; R. v. Sellars, 2018 BCCA 195 at para. 22.
 
An appeal court can intervene to vary a sentence only if the sentence is demonstrably unfit or if the sentencing judge made an error in principle that had an impact on the sentence: Friesen at para. 26; Sellars at para. 22; R. v. Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64 at paras. 41, 44. Errors in principle include “an error of law, a failure to consider a relevant factor, or erroneous consideration of an aggravating or mitigating factor”: Friesen at para. 26.
 
If a sentence is demonstrably unfit or the sentencing judge made a material error in principle, an appeal court must perform its own sentencing analysis to determine a fit sentence. The appeal court is to do so without deference to the existing sentence, even if that sentence falls within the applicable range. The appeal court must, however, recognize the expertise and advantageous position of the sentencing judge and defer to their findings of fact and identification of aggravating and mitigating circumstances (provided those findings are not affected by an error in principle): Friesen at paras. 27–28. 

Sentencing Principles
 
The purpose and principles of sentencing were codified in 1996. In striving to protect society and contribute to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society, s. 718 of the Code identifies denunciation, deterrence and rehabilitation, among others, as important sentencing objectives.
 
According to s. 718.1, the “fundamental principle” of sentencing is that a sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.
 
Section 718.2 identifies a number of other important principles. Under s. 718.2(a), a sentence must be increased or reduced to account for any relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances. Under s. 718.2(b), similar sentences should be imposed for similar offences committed in similar circumstances by similar offenders. Sections 718.2(c), (d) and (e) promote restraint in sentencing.

Gladue Principles

Given Mr. Kehoe’s Métis heritage, s. 718.2(e) of the Code has special importance. It provides: [A]ll available sanctions, other than imprisonment, that are reasonable in the circumstances and consistent with the harm done to victims or to the community should be considered for all offenders, with particular attention to the circumstances of Aboriginal offenders. 
[Emphasis added.]
 
In R. v. Gladue, 1 S.C.R. 688, 1999 CanLII 679, and R. v. Ipeelee, 2012 SCC 13, the Supreme Court of Canada made clear that s. 718.2(e) is remedial and is intended to deal with the continuing crisis of over‑representation of Indigenous offenders in the Canadian criminal justice system: Gladue at para. 33; Ipeelee at para. 59.
 
This crisis is driven by the alienation, poverty, substance abuse, lower educational attainment, lower rates of employment, and prejudice experienced by Indigenous people in Canada. Sentencing judges are to take judicial notice of how Canada’s colonial history and post-colonial assimilationist policies have translated into these terrible outcomes: Gladue at para. 83; Ipeelee at para. 60. These systemic and background factors do not excuse or justify criminal conduct. Rather, they provide the necessary context for understanding and evaluating case‑specific information during the sentencing exercise: Ipeelee at para. 83.
 
Systemic and background factors affect the incidence of crime and recidivism for all offenders. However, as the Supreme Court recognized, the circumstances of Indigenous offenders are different from other offenders because many Indigenous people are “victims of systemic and direct discrimination” and “dislocation” and are “substantially affected by poor social and economic conditions”: Gladue at para. 68.
 
The over‑representation of Indigenous people in Canada’s prison population is tied to broad societal issues. Nevertheless, the Supreme Court in Gladue and Ipeelee recognized that culturally attuned sentencing for Indigenous offenders has a role to play in addressing this crisis: Gladue at para. 65; Ipeelee at paras. 64–70; R. v. Mero, 2021 BCCA 399 at para. 68. 
 
Accordingly, Gladue and Ipeelee transformed the approach to sentencing Indigenous offenders. As with all offenders, a judge sentencing an Indigenous offender must take a holistic approach to imposing a fit sentence that is proportionate to the seriousness of the offence and the moral blameworthiness of the offender: Ipeelee at para. 37. However, since the circumstances of Indigenous offenders are “significantly different” from those of non-Indigenous offenders, the judge must pay particular attention to two factors: 

1. The unique systemic or background factors that may have played a part in bringing the particular Indigenous offender before the courts; and 
2. The types of sentencing procedures and sanctions that may be appropriate for the offender in the circumstances given their particular Indigenous heritage or connection. See Gladue at para. 66; Ipeelee at para. 59.
 
In considering systemic and background factors, the judge must take account of all the surrounding circumstances, including “the unique circumstances of the offender as an aboriginal person,” and display sensitivity to and understanding of the “difficulties aboriginal people have faced with both the criminal justice system and society at large”: Gladue at para. 81; Ipeelee at paras. 59–60, 75. 
 
It is not necessary to establish a direct causal link between systemic and background factors and the offence at issue. How the complex interplay of historical factors impacted a particular Indigenous offender may be difficult or impossible to establish. Nevertheless, the specific systemic or background factors at play are critically important. They may help the court assess the moral blameworthiness of the offender or identify appropriate sentencing objectives: Ipeelee at paras. 81–83; Hamer at para. 98.
 
As for the appropriate sanctions, while restorative sentences may be more appropriate for Indigenous offenders, applying Gladue principles will not necessarily lead to a reduced sentence. There is no automatic heritage-based discount: Gladue at para. 88; Ipeelee at paras. 71, 75; Mero at para. 73. Generally, the more serious or violent the crime, the more likely it will be, as a practical matter, that the terms of imprisonment will be the same for an Indigenous and a non‑Indigenous offender: Gladue at para. 33; R. v. Wells, 2000 SCC 10 at paras. 42–44; Ipeelee at paras. 84–85; Mero at para. 73.

That said, no offence is so serious that it negates the need for a sentencing judge to consider s. 718.2(e) of the Code and Gladue principles: Ipeelee at paras. 84–85. In fact, absent an informed waiver, sentencing judges have a duty to consider s. 718.2(e) and Gladue principles in every case involving an Indigenous offender: Gladue at para. 82. As the Court explained in Ipeelee at para. 87, a failure to do so constitutes an error in principle justifying appellate intervention: 
 
The sentencing judge has a statutory duty, imposed by s. 718.2(e) of the Criminal Code, to consider the unique circumstances of Aboriginal offenders. Failure to apply Gladue in any case involving an Aboriginal offender runs afoul of this statutory obligation. As these reasons have explained, such a failure would also result in a sentence that was not fit and was not consistent with the fundamental principle of proportionality. Therefore, application of the Gladue principles is required in every case involving an Aboriginal offender, including breach of an LTSO, and a failure to do so constitutes an error justifying appellate intervention. 

Discussion
 
Sentencing is a difficult process that often requires balancing competing principles and objectives. Will protection of the public be best achieved by a deterrent sentence or one focused on rehabilitating the offender? Where in the sentencing range does a particular offender belong when they have committed a serious offence but have a reduced level of moral blameworthiness? To what degree are aggravating features of the offence offset by mitigating circumstances?
 
In many cases involving the sentencing of Indigenous offenders, Canada’s assimilationist policies have been so successful that the offender may be largely or completely disconnected from their Indigenous culture, community and support: Hamer at para. 115. In such cases, an obvious tension arises in the task of balancing (1) the well-known principle that it is not necessary to establish a direct causal link between systemic and background factors and the offence at issue with (2) the requirement that it is nevertheless necessary to “evaluate relevant information about the significance of a person’s Indigenous identity and the individual’s circumstances as an Indigenous person”: Hamer at para. 117. 

As with all of the challenges in the sentencing process, we rely on the wisdom and experience of the sentencing judge to strike the right balance. In R. v. Whitehead, 2016 SKCA 165, the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal helpfully observed:

The link between systemic or background factors and moral culpability for an offence does not require a detailed chain of causative reasoning. Instead, the analysis is based on inferences drawn from the evidence based on the wisdom and experience of the sentencing judge…
 
In applying this approach, sentencing courts must pay careful attention to the complex harm that colonization and discrimination have inflicted on Aboriginal peoples.
 
In Hamer, there was nothing in the record to show that systemic or background factors had any impact on the self-identifying Indigenous offender’s life or his moral culpability. Mr. Hamer was informed by his mother that he was born from her relatively short and casual relationship with a man who had told her he was “part Cree”. Mr. Hamer’s biological father played no role in his life. The Gladue report writer was unable to confirm Mr. Hamer’s Indigenous heritage or community of origin. More importantly, the Gladue report writer was unable to comment on any potential intergenerational impacts which may have affected Mr. Hamer or his family members: Hamer at paras. 101–103.
 
Hamer is a clear example of the principle that Gladue principles do not apply simply because an offender is Indigenous. Indigeneity is not related to criminality. Rather, it is the adverse impact of Canada’s colonial history and assimilationist policies, if any, on a particular Indigenous offender that matters. The fact that an offender is Indigenous obliges a sentencing judge to consider Gladue principles but does not establish whether and how those principles will apply.
 
In this case, trial Crown invited the judge to conclude that Gladue principles should play a limited role because: 

• The dysfunction in Mr. Kehoe’s family home growing up related to his non-Indigenous step-father’s drug use and trafficking, not Gladue factors;
• The family’s frequent moves were connected to Mr. Kehoe’s step-father’s activities rather than his mother’s status as a Métis person; 
• Mr. Kehoe and his mother’s feeling of being “somewhat disconnected” from their Métis heritage “seems like an understatement”; 
• Neither Mr. Kehoe, his mother nor his grandparents attended residential school;
• Neither Mr. Kehoe nor his mother were raised with Indigenous cultural practices, “[s]o intergenerational dysfunction related to Gladue factors… don’t really seem to be at play here”; 
• Mr. Kehoe’s “substance abuse” and depression were related to his non-Indigenous step-father’s behaviours, not his mother’s background; 
• The breakdown of Mr. Kehoe’s family was due to his non-Indigenous biological father abandoning him and his non-Indigenous step-father’s behaviours, not Gladue factors;
• Instability in Mr. Kehoe’s life was caused by his mother and step-father’s partying lifestyle and his step-father’s actions;
• The death of Mr. Kehoe’s brother had “nothing to do with historical wrongs done to Indigenous people”;
• Insofar as violence was normalized in the Kehoe household, it consisted of yelling, not physical violence, and there was no suggestion that Mr. Kehoe’s mother or her parents had ever been victims of violence in their lives; and 
• While the problems Mr. Kehoe experienced in his life were relevant to sentencing, “[t]hey’re just not particularly tied to Gladue factors.”
 
I do not wish to be overly critical of trial Crown. Mr. Kehoe had committed a very serious offence and the application of Gladue principles was not as obvious as it would have been if Mr. Kehoe’s family had been directly affected by, for example, the “Sixties Scoop” or Canada’s operation of residential schools. But the position taken by the Crown was deeply flawed.
 
The overall thrust of the Crown’s submission was plain: because Mr. Kehoe and his mother were disconnected from their Métis heritage, Gladue principles should play essentially no role in determining a fit sentence for Mr. Kehoe. Mr. Kehoe’s difficulties were related primarily to his non-Indigenous step-father’s behaviours, not his heritage. 
 
This position is highly problematic for two reasons.
 
 First, as the Truth and Reconciliation Commission noted at pp. 1–3 of its summary report, “Honouring the Truth, Reconciling for the Future,” Canada developed and implemented “a coherent policy to eliminate Aboriginal people as distinct peoples and to assimilate them into the Canadian mainstream against their will.” Canada “pursued this policy of cultural genocide because it wished to divest itself of its legal and financial obligations to Aboriginal people and gain control over their land and resources.” Residential schooling was one of many tools Canada used to achieve its assimilationist objectives.
 
 As a consequence of Canada’s colonial history and assimilationist policies, many Indigenous people have become disconnected from their ancestral communities, cultures, and associated positive social structures. This disconnection has contributed to the social and economic marginalization of Indigenous people in Canada, including their disproportionate interactions with the criminal justice system. 
 
 Disconnection is one of the very harms associated with Canada’s colonial history and assimilationist policies that Gladue and Ipeelee seek to address. Accordingly, the Crown’s reasoning that Gladue principles should play a very limited role in this case because Mr. Kehoe was disconnected from his Indigenous culture, community and supports subverts the remedial purpose of s. 718.2(e) of the Code and penalizes Mr. Kehoe for the success of Canada’s destructive policies.
 
 Second, when determining whether and how Gladue principles applied to Mr. Kehoe, the issue was never whether he was disconnected from his Métis community, culture and supports. Rather, the issues were: (1) the role Canada’s colonial history and post-colonial assimilationist policies played in causing that disconnection; and (2) the role that disconnection played in his coming before the court.
 
I also do not wish to be overly critical of the sentencing judge. He correctly: 

• Noted s. 718.2(e) of the Code; 
• Accepted Mr. Kehoe’s submission that Indigenous women tend to have poor outcomes in Canadian society; 
• Accepted Mr. Kehoe’s submission that he “should consider systemic and background factors that have played a role in bringing the Indigenous person before the court and may have a mitigating effect on moral blameworthiness”; 
• Cited this Court’s decision in Hamer for the propositions that Mr. Kehoe was not required to establish a causal link between systemic and background factors and the offence, and that it was nevertheless important to consider whether the evidence established that systemic and background factors played a role in his offending behaviour; and 
• Indicated that he was taking account of the “unfortunate experiences” from Mr. Kehoe’s youth “both as general background factors and factors to be considered under s. 718.2(e).”
 
However, when I read the judge’s reasons for sentence generously, as a whole and in the context of the record, it is evident he adopted the Crown’s flawed reasoning. He accepted, without analysis, the Crown’s submission that there was a limited connection between Mr. Kehoe’s heritage and his offence. He also expressly accepted the Crown’s submission regarding the appropriate length of sentence. Both of these submissions were based largely and incorrectly on Mr. Kehoe’s disconnection from his Métis community and culture. The judge did not turn his mind to whether and how: (1) Canada’s colonial history and post-colonial assimilationist policies played a role in that disconnection and (2) the instability in Mr. Kehoe’s life may have been related to that disconnection.
 
I have great respect for the privileged position, experience and wisdom of the sentencing judge and a full appreciation of the challenging circumstances he faced. Nevertheless, in my view, he erred in principle. In relying on the Crown’s submission that Gladue principles should play a very limited role because Mr. Kehoe is disconnected from his Métis community and culture, the judge erred in law and failed to consider the role Canada’s colonial history and assimilationist policies may have played in bringing Mr. Kehoe before the court.
 
In my view, the judge’s error in principle was material to the sentencing exercise. I must therefore undertake the sentencing process afresh. 
 
Sentence
 
I take no issue with the judge’s view of the seriousness of Mr. Kehoe’s offence. His actions were unprovoked, senseless, violent and put the victim’s life in danger. Given his record of criminal offending and the role that his substance use disorder has played in it, I accept the judge’s comment that “an un-rehabilitated Mr. Kehoe is a danger to society.”
 
I also take no issue with the range of sentence identified by the judge. Craig establishes a range of 16 months to six years’ imprisonment for aggravated assault. Unprovoked attacks with weapons belong at the higher end of the range: Craig at para. 10.
 
The issue is whether Gladue principles have a meaningful role to play in sentencing Mr. Kehoe. In my view, they do.

The author of Mr. Kehoe’s Gladue report noted that the following “Gladue factors” impacted Mr. Kehoe and his family: 

1. Substance abuse and addiction in [Mr. Kehoe]’s immediate family and by [Mr. Kehoe] himself. 
2. Loneliness, depression, anger, trauma, suicidal ideation when [Mr. Kehoe] started cutting himself as a teenager. 
3. Family dysfunction, disruption and breakdown from the time [Mr. Kehoe] can first remember until he was homeless on the streets as a teenager. 
4. Instability as demonstrated by [Mr. Kehoe]’s frequent moves, his periods of homelessness and his abandonment by his mother and stepfather. 
5. The premature violent death of his brother Jamie due to street life involvement. 
6. Normalization of violence and neglect as demonstrated by his parents and experienced as a child so that [Mr. Kehoe] started using this as a method of survival for self-preservation.
 
There is no question that Mr. Kehoe was raised in a dysfunctional household where substance abuse, anger, verbal abuse, emotional abuse and criminal activity were normalized. There is also no question that the instability in Mr. Kehoe’s childhood contributed to his substance use disorder and anti-social behaviours. 
 
While Mr. Kehoe’s non-Indigenous step-father was primarily responsible for the dysfunctional environment that so adversely affected Mr. Kehoe’s childhood, an important question that arises is: Why was Mr. Kehoe in that environment?
 
The judge correctly observed that “[w]omen of [Indigenous] heritage have poor outcomes in our society.” Some of those poor outcomes include social and economic marginalization, instability, vulnerability to living in abusive and dangerous environments and the development of mental health issues and substance use disorder. It is widely recognized that an Indigenous woman’s disconnection from a functional and protective Indigenous community increases her risk of experiencing these outcomes: see, for example, “Reclaiming Power and Place: The Final Report of the National Inquiry into Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women Girls,” Vol 1b. at 108, 143. 
 
In this case, I do not find it difficult to infer that Canada’s colonial history and assimilationist policies played a role in bringing Mr. Kehoe before the court. That is because I do not consider it simply a coincidence that Mr. Kehoe’s mother (1) became disconnected from her Métis community and culture and (2) fell victim to the all too common plight of similarly situated Indigenous women across Canada. In the absence of policies specifically designed to disconnect Indigenous people from their communities, cultures and supports, Mr. Kehoe’s mother stood a much better chance of raising him in a stable and functional environment where his heritage was celebrated and where he would develop pro-social and community-oriented values.
 
On a proper application of Gladue principles, I consider Mr. Kehoe to have a significantly reduced level of moral blameworthiness. As I see it, systemic and background factors contributed to Mr. Kehoe being raised in a dysfunctional environment which in turn contributed to his substance use disorder and criminal offending.
 
I also consider it significant that Mr. Kehoe recognizes he needs to address his substance use disorder and has taken concrete steps to do so. The fact that Mr. Kehoe has had a couple of relapses is concerning, but slips and relapses are a normal part of the recovery process.
 
The hardest sentencing decisions involve offenders who have committed serious offences but have a reduced level of moral blameworthiness. In this case, considering the aggravated nature of Mr. Kehoe’s offence as well as his criminal record, reduced level of moral blameworthiness and efforts at rehabilitation, I would impose a sentence of 4 years’ imprisonment less time served. I would not disturb the ancillary orders made by the judge.
 
In my view, such a disposition would be adequate to address the primary sentencing objectives of denunciation, deterrence and protection of the public without unduly exacerbating the disproportionate rate of incarceration of Indigenous people in Canada. I, like the trial judge, hope that Mr. Kehoe will take advantage of the culturally appropriate programs available in Federal correctional facilities to continue his efforts at rehabilitation. 
 
Disposition

I would grant Mr. Kehoe leave to appeal his sentence, allow the appeal and sentence him to four years’ imprisonment less time served. I would not disturb the ancillary orders made by the judge. 


./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/ca/2023bcca37.html

Kyle Steven Zsombor appeals his conviction by Justice Hori of the Supreme Court of British Columbia, on a charge of committing aggravated assault against Joseph Gates. As the trial judge stated at the opening of his reasons for judgment, the circumstances of this case are “tragic”.

Mr. Zsombor and Mr. Gates were long-time friends. The incident occurred after they had been out drinking with other friends. An argument between the two of them ended when Mr. Zsombor punched Mr. Gates in the head, causing him to fall and strike his head on the ground. This resulted in Mr. Gates suffering a significant brain injury, which led to ongoing cognitive impairment and physical symptoms. The incident was recorded by a video surveillance camera.

Mr. Zsombor asserted he acted in self-defence. The trial judge found otherwise. On appeal Mr. Zsombor argues the judge erred in multiple respects in rejecting that defence, including by not addressing consent, a matter that had not been put in issue.

For the reasons that follow, I would dismiss this appeal. 

Factual Background
 
On April 4, 2018, Mr. Zsombor invited Mr. Gates to his house to get together with a group of long-time friends, namely Trent Kitsch, Brett Phillips, Quinn Best, and Doug Hartel. They arrived at Mr. Zsombor’s house at approximately 7 p.m. and stayed until about 10:30 p.m. During that time, they were drinking beer; some may have consumed Korean rice wine and smoked marihuana. The group then moved to the Doja Café, which was then owned by Mr. Kitsch, where they drank more beer.
 
At about 11:45 p.m. Mr. Zsombor went to the bathroom. The others left the café without him to get something to eat. A short time later, Mr. Zsombor went to look for them.

It is convenient to note here that the Crown called Mr. Gates, Mr. Kitsch, and Maria Kitsch, Mr. Kitsch’s spouse, as witnesses. Ms. Kitsch was not present when the altercation occurred. Mr. Zsombor was the only defence witness. The trial judge had concerns about the reliability of the evidence given by all of the witnesses except Ms. Kitsch, because of the amount of alcohol they had consumed. In particular, the judge found Mr. Gates’s and Mr. Zsombor’s recollections of what occurred to be neither reliable nor credible, both due to the effects of alcohol and because their evidence was coloured by self-interest. 

On the other hand, he found Mr. Kitsch’s evidence to be credible.

Mr. Zsombor met up with the others. After Mr. Best and Mr. Philips had left, Mr. Zsombor, Mr. Kitsch, Mr. Gates, and Mr. Hartel returned to the café and then went into the alley behind it. Mr. Zsombor was mad at them for having left without him. Mr. Gates tried to calm Mr. Zsombor down and, in the course of doing so, pushed Mr. Zsombor several times. As the judge set out in his reasons (at para. 21), the following is depicted in the video recorded by the café’s surveillance camera: 

• Mr. Kitsch, Mr. Hartel, Mr. Gates and Mr. Zsombor are standing in the area behind the [Doja] Cafe with Mr. Kitsch and Mr. Hartel positioned between Mr. Zsombor in the alley; 
• Mr. Zsombor is holding a case of beer in his left hand and his right arm is inside his coat sleeve; 
• Mr. Gates is gesturing with his right hand and holding a beer in his left hand; 
• Mr. Gates initially puts his right hand on Mr. Zsombor’s left shoulder, but soon thereafter, he pushes Mr. Zsombor in the chest area with his right hand and both parties move apart from each other; 
• Mr. Gates then makes a downward gesture with his right hand and Mr. Zsombor moves towards Mr. Gates; 
• Mr. Gates then pushes Mr. Zsombor in the chest area for a second time and Mr. Zsombor is pushed backwards; 
• When Mr. Zsombor moves forward again, Mr. Gates pushes Mr. Zsombor for a third time, but this time in the area of his left arm and Mr. Zsombor is pushed backwards again; 
• Mr. Gates then makes a downward motion with his right hand; 
• Mr. Gates then pushes Mr. Zsombor for a fourth time in the chest area and then drops his right hand to waist level again gesturing downward; 
• Mr. Zsombor draws his right hand backwards and then steps forward with a striking motion using his right hand and striking Mr. Gates in the head area; 
• Mr. Gates’ head snaps backward and Mr. Gates falls backward to the ground; 
• Mr. Zsombor takes two or three steps forward and goes down on top of Mr. Gates.

As described by Mr. Kitsch, Mr. Zsombor attempted to continue fighting with Mr. Gates, but stopped immediately when he realized Mr. Gates had been knocked out and was injured.

Relevant Statutory Provisions

Section 268(1) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, provides: Every one commits an aggravated assault who wounds, maims, disfigures or endangers the life of the complainant.

Self-defence is governed by s. 34 of the Criminal Code: 

(1) A person is not guilty of an offence if 
(a) they believe on reasonable grounds that force is being used against them or another person or that a threat of force is being made against them or another person; 
(b) the act that constitutes the offence is committed for the purpose of defending or protecting themselves or the other person from that use or threat of force; and 
(c) the act committed is reasonable in the circumstances. 
(2) In determining whether the act committed is reasonable in the circumstances, the court shall consider the relevant circumstances of the person, the other parties and the act, including, but not limited to, the following factors: 
(a) the nature of the force or threat; 
(b) the extent to which the use of force was imminent and whether there were other means available to respond to the potential use of force; 
(c) the person’s role in the incident; 
(d) whether any party to the incident used or threatened to use a weapon; 
(e) the size, age, gender and physical capabilities of the parties to the incident;
(f) the nature, duration and history of any relationship between the parties to the incident, including any prior use or threat of force and the nature of that force or threat; 
(f.1) any history of interaction or communication between the parties to the incident; 
(g) the nature and proportionality of the person’s response to the use or threat of force; and 
(h) whether the act committed was in response to a use or threat of force that the person knew was lawful.
 
In R. v. Khill, 2021 SCC 37 at para. 51, 409 C.C.C. (3d) 141, the Court conceptualized the three elements in s. 34(1) as: 

(i) the catalyst; 
(ii) the motive; and 
(iii) the response. 
 
Defence Counsel’s Closing Submissions
 
Mr. Zsombor’s counsel (who is not counsel on this appeal), began by stating that the issue in the case was “very focused” and ultimately would come down to s. 34(1)(c) of the Criminal Code, namely, whether Mr. Zsombor’s act in punching Mr. Gates was reasonable in the circumstances; he later referred to the application of s. 34(1)(c) as the “critical issue in the case.” Counsel urged the trial judge to find that Mr. Zsombor punched Mr. Gates in self-defence, to stop Mr. Gates from continuing to push him. He addressed some of the factors listed in s. 34(2).
 
Counsel also submitted that if self-defence did not apply, then the issues would be whether Mr. Zsombor’s conduct was “reflexive” or “instinctual in nature” and whether the Crown had proven the mens rea of aggravated assault, i.e., whether, in the circumstances, a reasonable person in Mr. Zsombor’s circumstances would have realized that punching Mr. Gates in the head would subject Mr. Gates to the risk of bodily harm. 

Crown Counsel’s Closing Submissions
 
Crown counsel conceded Mr. Gates had applied force to Mr. Zsombor (s. 34(1)(a)) but submitted Mr. Zsombor’s response had been neither for a defence purpose (s. 34(1)(b)), nor reasonable in the circumstances (s. 34(1)(c)). He submitted Mr. Zsombor acted out of anger and not for the purpose of defending himself. With reference to some of the factors in s. 34(2), counsel submitted Mr. Zsombor’s response to being pushed was unreasonable. He further submitted the punch thrown by Mr. Zsombor was a voluntary act, not a reflexive one. 

Trial Judge’s Reasons
 
The trial judge began by summarizing the evidence and setting out his findings with respect to the reliability and credibility of the witnesses. 

He then addressed the issues that had been raised by counsel under the headings “Aggravated Assault” and “Self-Defence”

With reference to R. v. Farrar, 2019 NSSC 46 at para. 32, and R. v. Fontaine, 2011 BCCA 140 at para. 25, 274 C.C.C. (3d) 474, the judge set out the elements of aggravated assault as follows (at para. 34): 

(a) the accused intentionally applied force to the complainant; 
(b) the complainant did not consent to the force the accused intentionally applied; 
(c) the accused knew that the complainant did not consent to the force being applied; 
(d) the force applied wounded, maimed, disfigured or endangered the complainant's life; and 
(e) a reasonable person, in the circumstances, would realize that the force applied would put the complainant at risk of suffering some kind of bodily harm, although not necessarily serious bodily harm or the precise kind of harm that the complainant suffered. He went on to find that the Crown had proven each of them beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
The judge dismissed Mr. Zsombor’s argument that his conduct was reflexive, finding that, as Mr. Zsombor struck Mr. Gates only after he had been pushed by him four times, Mr. Zsombor could not have been taken by surprise by Mr. Gates.

The judge then addressed Mr. Zsombor’s argument that he had acted in self-defence. Referring to R. v. Tremblay, 2019 BCSC 410, a decision cited by Mr. Zsombor’s counsel, the judge summarized the legal principles applicable to self-defence (at para. 51): 

a) The Crown bears the burden of disproving the defence of self-defence. To meet this burden, it need only prove beyond a reasonable doubt that one of the three elements of the defence does not apply. All three of the s. 34(1) criteria must be present for the defence to be available: [Tremblay] para. 172. 
b) In deciding whether the Crown has met its burden, the [court] must consider the whole of the evidence and, throughout the analysis, the court must remain mindful of the fact that the accused is presumed innocent unless and until the Crown meets its burden of proof: para. 173. 
c) The law does not require that an accused retreat before acting in self-defence, although a failure to do so may be relevant to the s. 34(1) and (2) analysis: para. 174. 
d) A person who is under attack and defending themselves cannot be expected to weigh to a nicety the exact measure of the defensive action required: para. 174. 
e) In self-defence cases, evidence showing that the complainant has a predisposition to violence is admissible: para. 175.
 
The judge proceeded to consider self-defence, noting firstly that the Crown had conceded that: 

(i) there was an air of reality to that defence; and 
(ii) the element set out in s. 34(1)(a), i.e., whether Mr. Zsombor believed Mr. Gates was using force against him, was satisfied.

With respect to s. 34(1)(b), the judge was satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the punch Mr. Zsombor threw had not been for a defensive or protective purpose. The judge referred to the evidence of Mr. Kitsch that: 

(i) Mr. Zsombor had been “very mad”; 
(ii) Mr. Gates had been trying to calm Mr. Zsombor down; and 
(iii) when Mr. Gates fell backward to the ground, Mr. Zsombor initially sought to continue the fight, until he realized Mr. Gates was injured. 

The judge specifically rejected Mr. Zsombor’s evidence that he merely “swatted” Mr. Gates to stop Mr. Gates from pushing him. In concluding his discussion of this element, the judge stated:
 
In this case, I do not accept the evidence of Mr. Zsombor and, based on the evidence of Mr. Kitsch and the video surveillance recording, I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Zsombor punched Mr. Gates and, when he did so, it was not for a defensive or protective purpose, but to engage Mr. Gates in a fight. When Mr. Zsombor punched Mr. Gates, the video shows that Mr. Gates had his arms and hands lowered. The video also shows Mr. Zsombor take two or three steps before he drops to the ground on top of Mr. Gates. According to Mr. Kitsch, Mr. Zsombor appeared to drop on top of Mr. Gates to continue the fight. 
 
I see nothing in the conduct of Mr. Zsombor that is defensive or protective. On the contrary, Mr. Zsombor’s action in punching Mr. Gates is an offensive action. He was intending, as indicated by Mr. Kitsch, to engage Mr. Gates in a fight. While I recognize in some situations a strong offence is the best defence, in the circumstances of this confrontation between childhood friends, it was not necessary to take such an offensive approach. Accordingly, the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that the second element of self-defence is not satisfied. 
 
Therefore, the defence of self-defence is not available to Mr. Zsombor.
 
The judge stated that the Crown needed only to prove that one of the three elements of self-defence did not apply. Nevertheless, he went on to assess the element set out in s. 34(1)(c), i.e., whether Mr. Zsombor’s action were reasonable in the circumstances. After noting that: 

(i) the force applied by Mr. Gates was relatively minor; 
(ii) Mr. Zsombor and Mr. Gates were long-time friends who knew each other well; 
(iii) there had never been a physical confrontation between them; 
(iv) Mr. Zsombor was very mad and Mr. Gates was only attempting to calm him down; and 
(v) Mr. Zsombor was heavier than Mr. Gates but both were athletic and active persons, the judge stated:
 
I must not judge the reasonableness of Mr. Zsombor's action by the serious nature of the injuries suffered by Mr. Gates. I also recognize that Mr. Zsombor is not required to measure to a nicety his response. However, given the nature of the force applied to Mr. Zsombor and the longstanding friendship between Mr. Zsombor and Mr. Gates, the reaction of Mr. Zsombor in throwing the punch to the area of Mr. Gates’ head was not reasonable. Longstanding close friends who have not had any physical confrontation would not react in that way.
 
Therefore, I find that the third element of self-defence is not satisfied. 

Grounds of Appeal
 
In his factum, Mr. Zsombor states his ground of appeal as follows:

ISSUE 1: The trial judge erred in his application of s. 34(1) of the Criminal Code by:

conflating the second and third element of the test for self-defence; by 
concluding that Mr. Zsombor’s actions were offensive thereby not for a defensive or protective purpose; 
glossing over the events which precipitated the act; and 
failing to acknowledge that a state of anger can coexist with a defensive or protective purpose.

ISSUE 2: The trial judge erred in failing to consider the defence of consent. 

Analysis 

Issue 1: Self-Defence
 
Mr. Zsombor contends the trial judge’s reasons for rejecting self-defence are flawed in multiple respects. I will say now that at their core, his arguments are an attempt to have us retry the case and reach a different conclusion on the evidence than that reached by the judge. 

This is reflected in the fact that the primary relief he seeks is an acquittal, which here we could only grant if we reweighed the evidence. That, however, is not our function. Apposite is the following from the judgment of Chief Justice Culliton in R. v. Andres, 1979 CanLII 2238 (SK CA), 2 W.W.R. 249 at 251 (Sask. C.A.): The Court of Appeal cannot and should not set aside a conviction merely because it would have taken a different view of the evidence than did the trial judge. The Court of Appeal must remember that it is neither its duty nor its function to re-try cases — its function is one of review.

The first argument is that the judge conflated the second and third elements of self-defence—motive and response—by considering whether Mr. Zsombor’s actions were necessary, instead of focusing on his subjective state of mind. This argument relates the judge’s statement in para. 60 of his reasons that “it was not necessary [for Mr. Zsombor] to take such an offensive approach”. However, this statement cannot be read in isolation. Not only was the judge provided with case law and submissions with respect to the motive element requiring a subjective analysis, more importantly, it is clear from his reasons that he engaged in such an analysis. The judge commenced his discussion of this element as follows:
 
The second element of self-defence requires that the act constituting the offence be for defensive or protective purposes. In this case, the question is whether Mr. Zsombor struck Mr. Gates in order to defend or protect himself. In assessing the second element of the offence, I am mindful that Mr. Zsombor is not required to retreat before acting in self-defence and that he is not required to weigh the exact measure of his defensive response. However, the response to the application of force must be defensive or protective in nature. …
 
I see nothing in the conduct of Mr. Zsombor that is defensive or protective. On the contrary, Mr. Zsombor's action in punching Mr. Gates is an offensive action. He was intending, as indicated by Mr. Kitsch, to engage Mr. Gates in a fight. [Emphasis added.]
 
Next, also in relation to para. 60 of the judge’s reasons, Mr. Zsombor contends the conclusion his actions were offensive, rather than defensive or protective, was irrational. He says the distinction between offensive and defensive conduct is “unhelpful” because self-defence is premised on an accused having committed an act rather than standing by passively. Similarly, he argues that the judge “unduly limited the scope of self-defence … by implicitly concluding that fighting back, acting offensively, within seconds of being pushed four times, could not be for a defensive or protective purpose.”
 
These arguments are grounded in a parsing of the judge’s reasons. 
 
When those reasons are read as a whole, it is clear that the judge used the words “offensive action” as another way of expressing the conclusion regarding Mr. Zsombor’s subjective state of mind that he had already reached in para. 59, namely, that Mr. Zsombor’s purpose was to engage Mr. Gates in a fight. Further, the judge did not limit the scope of self-defence by concluding that “fighting back” could not be for a defensive or protective purpose; indeed, he noted in para. 60 that “in some situations a strong offence is the best defence.” What he concluded is that this did not happen in this case.
 
Next, in relation to para. 60, Mr. Zsombor contends the judge’s statement that he saw “nothing in the conduct of Mr. Zsombor that is defensive or protective” is “completely unreasonable” given that Mr. Gates pushed Mr. Zsombor four times before the punch was thrown. Mr. Zsombor says that it is hard to understand how intending to engage in a fight after being pushed precludes having a defensive or protective purpose. Once again, this argument is grounded in a parsing of the reasons.
 
I accept that an accused’s purposes may be layered, in that they may act for a defensive purpose in addition to another purpose. However, for the defence of self-defence to succeed, the accused must have acted for a defensive or protective purpose, regardless of what other purposes may have co-existed. 
Here the judge found no protective or defensive purpose. That finding was open to him on the facts.
 
Next, Mr. Zsombor submits that in finding Mr. Gates attempted to calm him down, the judge misapprehended Mr. Kitsch’s evidence. He says this is incorrect because while Mr. Kitsch testified Mr. Gates was attempting to calm Mr. Zsombor down, he also testified both had their voices raised to same level and that Mr. Gates was aggressive. Of note is that in cross-examination, Mr. Kitsch stated that what he meant by aggressive was Mr. Gates pushing Mr. Zsombor. I would not give effect to this argument; it is no more than a disagreement with the judge’s interpretation of the evidence, which included the video recording: see R. v. Swales, 2014 BCCA 350 at para. 49, 360 B.C.A.C. 291.
 
Mr. Zsombor’s remaining submissions are with respect to s. 34(1)(c); i.e., whether his response was reasonable. He submits the judge’s analysis of his conduct was “unduly narrowed and impermissibly circumscribed” and that “[l]ooking at the incident, globally and holistically, it [was] wholly unreasonable to conclude that [his response to Mr. Gates’s actions] … was unreasonable.” However, Mr. Zsombor has failed to identify any palpable and overring errors in the judge’s fact finding or inference drawing, any misapprehension of evidence, or any misapplication of legal principles. Rather, what he seeks is to have this Court reweigh the evidence and retry the case. That, as mentioned above, is not something this Court can do.
 
I would not accede to the first ground of appeal. 
 
Issue 2: Consent
 
Mr. Zsombor submits the trial judge erred in failing to consider whether the Crown had proven Mr. Gates had not consented to engaging in a fist fight and, therefore, whether the punch Mr. Zsombor threw amounted to an assault. This argument rests on s. 265 of the Criminal Code, which states: 

(1) A person commits an assault when 
(a) Without the consent of another person, he applies force intentionally to that other person directly or indirectly; 
… 
(2) This section applies to all forms of assault, including sexual assault, sexual assault with a weapon, threats to a third party or causing bodily harm and aggravated sexual assault. [Emphasis added.]

As discussed in R. v. Jobidon, 1991 CanLII 77 (SCC), [1991] 2 S.C.R. 714 at 766–768, and R. v. Paice, 2005 SCC 22 at paras. 10–14, [2005] 1 S.C.R. 229, in the context of a fist fight between adults, the defence of consent applies except for blows that are intended to and do cause serious hurt or non-trivial bodily harm. Consent is also vitiated when one party employs tactics that change the nature of the consensual fight from an activity with some risk of serious bodily harm to one with a significant risk of such harm; i.e., tactics that were not reasonably contemplated in the first instance: R. v. Sullivan, 2011 NLCA 6 at paras. 34–38, 270 C.C.C. (3d) 93.
 
Mr. Zsombor did not raise Mr. Gates’s consent as an issue at the trial. Indeed, the word “consent” appears only once in the transcript when Mr. Zsombor’s counsel, in advancing self-defence, stated a person has the right to defend themself against an assault to which they did not consent.
 
The judge referred to “consent” in addressing the five elements of aggravated assault:
 
On the issue of consent, there is no dispute. I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Gates did not consent to being struck by Mr. Zsombor. 
I am also satisfied that Mr. Zsombor knew that there was no consent from Mr. Gates.
 
Mr. Zsombor’s initial position, as set out in his factum and advanced at the hearing of this appeal, was that because of the way the case was presented, the judge conducted no analysis of consent in addressing either the elements of aggravated assault or the elements of self-defence. He says the above-quoted statement was the product of the judge having treated the failure of defence counsel to address consent as a concession that a lack of consent had been established. He further argued that even though the issue of consent was not raised, the judge was obligated to consider it. We did not find it necessary to call on the Crown to respond to those arguments.
 
In his reply submissions, Mr. Zsombor again addressed consent, advancing what was described as “a better presented argument”. Accepting that the judge had found Mr. Gates did not consent to being punched, Mr. Zsombor submitted that once the judge found his motive was to engage Mr. Gates in a fight (see para. 59), the judge had to go back and reconsider whether there was a doubt about Mr. Gates’s lack of consent.
 
To begin, I do not accept Mr. Zsombor’s argument that the judge failed to consider consent. The judge was aware that absence of consent was an element of aggravated assault the Crown was required to prove beyond a reasonable doubt, listing it at para. 34 as among the elements of the offence. His statement that there was “no dispute” in regard to consent reflects the fact that Mr. Zsombor’s counsel did not suggest Mr. Gates’s consent was an issue when he addressed the elements of aggravated assault. There is no reason to doubt the veracity of this statement. Nevertheless, the judge did address all of those elements. In light of counsel’s submissions, the brevity of that portion of his reasons is not surprising. However, even if it could be said the judge’s treatment of consent rested solely on the fact consent had not been put in issue—i.e., that he did not turn his mind to an analysis of the evidence to determine whether the Crown had met its burden—I would not accede to Mr. Zsombor’s argument.
 
Mr. Zsombor submits a trial judge has a duty to consider all available defences regardless of whether they are raised by defence counsel. 

In his factum, he says “[t]he failure of counsel to meaningfully address the issue of consent did not relieve the trial judge of his obligation to do so.” 

I not do accept the judge had that obligation. 

Mr. Zsombor relies on the following from Justice Major’s judgment in R. v. Ewanchuk, 1999 CanLII 711 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 330: 55

The trial judge explicitly chose not to consider whether the accused had the defence of honest but mistaken belief in consent, and concluded that the defence was probably not available unless the accused testified. This conclusion ignores the right of the accused to have this defence considered solely on the Crown’s case. The trial judge paid only passing interest to this defence undoubtedly because he had concluded that the defence of implied consent exonerated the accused. The accused is entitled to have all available defences founded on a proper basis considered by the court, whether he raises them or not: see R. v. Bulmer, 1987 CanLII 56 (SCC), [1987] 1 S.C.R. 782, at p. 789. [Emphasis added.] In my view, this passage does not support the proposition that a trial judge, sitting without a jury, is obligated to address issues that counsel have not raised.
 
The context in which the above-quoted passage was written is important. In acquitting Mr. Ewanchuk of sexual assault, the trial judge relied on the defence of implied consent, a defence that does not exist in law. 

The judge rejected the defence of honest but mistaken belief in consent—which does exist —because Mr. Ewanchuk had not testified. The Court of Appeal for Alberta affirmed the acquittal. On further appeal, the Supreme Court of Canada entered a conviction. In so doing, it held the judge had erred in the manner in which he dealt with the defence of honest but mistake belief. In other words, Ewanchuk is not a case in which a trial judge failed to consider a defence at all, but one in which only passing reference was made to a defence that does exist in favour of considering one that does not.
 
The other aspect of Ewanchuk of note is that the authority cited by Major J., R. v. Bulmer, 1987 CanLII 56 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 782, deals with the obligations of a trial judge sitting with a jury. In that case, Justice McIntyre stated (at 789): It is well settled law that in his charge the trial judge must put to the jury all defences that may arise upon the evidence, whether they have been raised by counsel for the defence or not. In doing so, he is obliged to explain the law respecting the defence and to refer the jury to the evidence which may be relevant on that issue. 
Before putting the defence, however, the trial judge must decide whether in the facts before him the defence arises on the evidence. It is only when he decides this question in favour of the defence that he must leave it to the jury, for a trial judge is not bound to put every defence suggested by counsel in the absence of some evidentiary base. Indeed, he should not do so, for to put a wholly unsupported defence would only cause confusion. [Emphasis added.]
 
In my view, Ewanchuk does not stand for the proposition that a trial judge sitting without a jury has a duty to address issues that were not raised. The existence of such a duty is incompatible with what the Supreme Court of Canada has said concerning a trial judge’s duty to give sufficient reasons. It should be noted that the present case does not require consideration of a trial judge’s duty to assist a self-represented accused: see R. v. Neidig, 2018 BCCA 485 at paras. 90–93.
 
As discussed in R. v. Squire, 1976 CanLII 26 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 13 at 19, when a jury is the trier-of-fact, defence counsel may choose not to advance alternative or inconsistent positions in their jury address out of concern that doing so might weaken or prejudice the accused’s primary position.

For example, in a murder case in which the live issues are alibi (i.e., the accused contends they were elsewhere when the crime was committed) and whether the perpetrator had the requisite mens rea, defence counsel might choose to focus solely on alibi, rather than saying to the jury, in effect, “You should find my client was not there, but if you are satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that my client was there, then you should find they did not have the requisite state of mind.” Counsel can be selective, safe in the knowledge the trial judge has an obligation to charge the jury on all defences for which, on the evidence, there is an “air of reality”: R. v. Cinous, 2002 SCC 29 at para. 51, 2 S.C.R. 3. It is now common for trial judges to discuss with counsel the instructions to be given a jury at a pre-charge conference. One of the purposes of such conferences is to provide defence counsel the opportunity to request the jury be instructed on matters counsel does not wish to mention in closing submissions. However, the concerns referred to in Squires do not exist in judge-alone trials.

With respect to judge-alone trials, the Supreme Court of Canada has stated repeatedly that judges are entitled to rely on the submissions of counsel as delineating what is in dispute—i.e., the “live issues”—and to decide the case on that basis. As Justice Charron stated in R. v. Dinardo, 2008 SCC 24, 1 S.C.R. 788: [R. v. Sheppard, 2002 SCC 26, [2002] 1 S.C.R. 869] instructs appeal courts to adopt a functional approach to reviewing the sufficiency of reasons (para. 55).

The inquiry should not be conducted in the abstract, but should be directed at whether the reasons respond to the case’s live issues, having regard to the evidence as a whole and the submissions of counsel (R. v. D. (J.J.R.) (2006), 2006 CanLII 40088 (ON CA), 215 C.C.C. (3d) 252 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 32). An appeal based on insufficient reasons will only be allowed where the trial judge's reasons are so deficient that they foreclose meaningful appellate review: Sheppard, at para. 25. {Emphasis added.] Justice Binnie put it this way in R. v. Walker, 2008 SCC 34 at para. 20, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 245: Reasons are sufficient if they are responsive to the case’s live issues and the parties’ key arguments. Their sufficiency should be measured not in the abstract, but as they respond to the substance of what was in issue. [Emphasis added.] See also: R. v. R.E.M., 2008 SCC 51 at para. 43, [2008] 3 S.C.R. 3.
 
 Mr. Gates’s consent was never a live issue. Although self-defence was the primary argument advanced on Mr. Zsombor’s behalf, his counsel also argued that the Crown had failed to prove the punch he threw amounted to an aggravated assault. In advancing that alternative argument, counsel referred to the need for the Crown to prove Mr. Zsombor intentionally punched Mr. Gates and that a reasonable person in Mr. Zsombor’s circumstances would have realized punching Mr. Gates in the head would subject Mr. Gates to the risk of bodily harm. However, a “consent fight” defence was never advanced; indeed, it was not apparent on the evidence. Accordingly, the trial judge was not obligated to deal with consent.

I would not accede to this ground of appeal.

Disposition 

I would dismiss this appeal.


./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/ca/2023bcca8.html

Mr. Kooner was convicted of leaving the scene of an accident, knowing bodily harm was caused. No one saw the driver of the vehicle at the moment of the collision, and so the evidence against him was circumstantial.

The collision occurred on April 14, 2017. The facts as found by the trial judge were that Mr. Kooner was driving a white truck at around 11 p.m. on Fraser Highway in Surrey, BC, when he rear-ended a vehicle causing such damage and force that it sent that vehicle into an oncoming lane of traffic. The propelled vehicle caused a head-on collision with another vehicle which flipped over onto its roof. Mr. Kooner carried on driving, taking a right turn at the nearby intersection and then pulling over at an angle onto the side of the road. He got out of the truck and then went into the woods. A police dog tracked him down, and he was found in possession of a key to the truck. 

The drivers of the other two vehicles were injured, but the most serious injuries were to the driver of the vehicle that flipped over.

Mr. Kooner appeals on the basis that the circumstantial evidence was not sufficient to establish: first, that he was the driver and, second, even if he was the driver, that he knew that the drivers of other vehicles suffered bodily harm as a result of the collision.

While Mr. Kooner attempts to characterize these grounds as errors of law, these arguments are challenges to the judge’s factual conclusions based on inferences drawn from the circumstantial evidence. This Court must exercise considerable deference to findings of fact, as it is for the trial judge to decide if there are other inferences available that are sufficient to raise a reasonable doubt: R. v. Villaroman, 2016 SCC 33 at paras. 56, 71; R. v. Nguyen, 2020 BCCA 166 at paras. 23–25.

The charge for which Mr. Kooner was convicted was based on s. 252(1.2) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 (since repealed and replaced by s. 320.16). At the time of the accident s. 252 provided:

252 (1) Every person commits an offence who has the care, charge or control of a vehicle, vessel or aircraft that is involved in an accident with 
…
(b) a vehicle
… 
…and with intent to escape civil or criminal liability fails to stop the vehicle… give his or her name and address and, where any person has been injured or appears to require assistance, offer assistance. 
(1.1) Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1) in a case not referred to in subsection (1.2) or (1.3) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction. 
(1.2) Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1) knowing that bodily harm has been caused to another person involved in the accident is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years. 
(1.3) Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life if 
(a) the person knows that another person involved in the accident is dead; or 
(b) the person knows that bodily harm has been caused to another person involved in the accident and is reckless as to whether the death of the other person results from that bodily harm, and the death of that other person so results. 
(2) In proceedings under subsection (1), evidence that an accused failed to stop his vehicle, … offer assistance where any person has been injured or appears to require assistance and give his name and address is, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, proof of an intent to escape civil or criminal liability.

As can be seen, there are increasing degrees of criminal culpability for a hit-and-run, starting with leaving the scene of an accident; leaving the scene knowing that bodily harm has been caused to another person; and even greater culpability for leaving the scene knowing death has been caused or reckless as to whether death resulted from the bodily harm.

Bodily harm is defined in s. 2 of the Criminal Code as meaning “any hurt or injury to a person that interferes with the health or comfort of the person and is more than merely transient or trifling in nature”.

The law on the use of circumstantial evidence was explained by the Supreme Court of Canada in Villaroman. The judge below correctly instructed himself on the law, holding:
 
In R. v. Villaroman, 2016 SCC 33, the court provides guidelines in assessing circumstantial evidence in a trial. At paragraph 30, the court notes that inferences drawn from circumstantial evidence must be considered in light of all of the evidence, as well as the absence of evidence, assessed logically with reference to human experience and common sense. Later at paragraph 35, the court comments that the trier of fact should consider if there are reasonable inferences other than guilty when assessing circumstantial evidence. Further, at paragraph 38, the basic question is whether the circumstantial evidence viewed logically and in light of human experience is reasonably capable of supporting an inference other than the guilt of the accused. Lastly, at paragraph 41, to justify a conviction, the circumstantial evidence, assessed in light of human experience, should be such that it excludes any other reasonable alternative.
 
When considering the reasonable inferences that can be drawn from circumstantial evidence, the court is to consider inferences consistent with innocence, even if those inferences arise because of a lack of evidence or on something less than proven facts. However, any inferences drawn must be reasonable and assessed logically, in light of human experience and common sense: R. v. Whitmore, 2021 BCCA 302 at para. 58, citing Villaroman. 

Sufficiency of Evidence that Mr. Kooner was the Driver
 
The appellant says that the evidence was not sufficient to establish that he was the driver of the vehicle that was involved in the accident and left the scene.
 
The judge recognized that the first question for him on the hit-and-run offence was whether the Crown proved beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Kooner was the driver. Since no one saw Mr. Kooner in the driver’s seat, the judge instructed himself to determine whether the circumstantial evidence was capable of supporting any inference other than the inference that Mr. Kooner was the driver of the vehicle: at para. 20.
 
The judge then reviewed the circumstantial evidence with this approach in mind. 
 
The key witness was another driver on the highway, Mr. Multani. He was returning from work at his restaurant. He was in the inner of two lanes of traffic, which were about to merge into a single lane. He saw a white truck pass him on the right, but could not see inside the vehicle. 
 
After the merge, Mr. Multani saw the driver of the white truck pass other vehicles by pulling out across the center line into the oncoming lane (at that point there were no oncoming vehicles) before merging back into the proper lane for his direction of travel. Mr. Multani estimated that the driver passed him at a speed of between 40 and 60 km per hour in a 50 km per hour zone, and he described the manner of driving as aggressive.
 
Mr. Multani did not see the white truck continuously to the point of impact but, as he approached 140 Street, he heard the noise of an impact, saw dust and smoke, and a car rolled over in the oncoming lane. He then decided to pass by the accident and follow the white truck. 
 
The drivers of the vehicles that were involved in the accident gave evidence, Mr. Wong and Ms. Baah. In summary, Mr. Wong was driving his red Honda CRV when it was struck from behind by the white truck, sustaining significant damage. The force propelled his vehicle forward into the oncoming lane of traffic, where he collided head-on with a car driven by Ms. Baah. Her vehicle flipped over onto its roof as a result of the collision. 
 
The driver of the white truck turned right on 140 Street. Following the vehicle, Mr. Multani turned right as well and noticed that the white truck was stopped near the intersection with 96 Avenue. He saw a man outside of the truck standing on the sidewalk approximately 20 feet away. The driver side airbag was deployed in the white truck. The man walked a bit, looked like he tried to hide behind a tree, and then moved deeper into a wooded area. Mr. Multani did not see anyone else nearby. He parked his vehicle and called 911.
 
A police officer, Cst. McLuckie, arrived at the scene. He saw that the white truck was significantly damaged on the front driver’s side, with dark red paint in the scratches. The vehicle was locked and unoccupied. 
 
Mr. Multani spoke to Cst. McLuckie and told him about the person who fled into the bushes. Cst. McLuckie radioed for a dog tracker. Cst. McLuckie did not see any other pedestrians. 
 
Staff Sgt. King arrived with a police dog. The dog began to track from the sidewalk where Mr. Multani had seen the man walking, due to concern about contamination by others in the area between the truck and the sidewalk. Another police officer who arrived, Cst. Bucher, accompanied Staff Sgt. King with the dog. Picking up and following the track for about 50 meters, the dog led the police officers to a spot where, using a flashlight, the officers were able to see Mr. Kooner lying on his back on the ground in the bramble. They advised him that he was under arrest. 
 
Another police officer arrived on scene, Cst. Tam. He said Mr. Kooner claimed that his back, leg, knee, and head hurt. Mr. Kooner asked Cst. Tam where was the driver. This latter statement was not admitted for the truth of it but rather, in support of an obstruction of justice charge which the judge found was not proven.
 
When the police officers asked Mr. Kooner for his identification, he produced his wallet and keys. One key had the same logo as the brand of the white truck and, when police officers tested the key, it unlocked and started the white truck.
 
On appeal, Mr. Kooner argues that the evidence was not sufficient to establish that Mr. Kooner was the driver. He points to certain “gaps” in the circumstantial evidence:

a) Mr. Multani arrived at the location of the white truck at the side of the road after it was parked there and did not see the person on the sidewalk get out of the vehicle; 
b) The police dog did not start tracking from the vehicle but, rather, started from the sidewalk; 
c) The police did not check the DNA on the driver-side airbag and match it to Mr. Kooner; 
d) There could have been multiple sets of keys to the vehicle, or the driver could have handed Mr. Kooner the key. Further, the police did not say whether the vehicle was a push start vehicle. 
 
Mr. Kooner also says that the police never matched the red paint on the damaged part of the white truck with the paint on Mr. Wong’s car; and Mr. Multani did not have a continuous view of the white truck to know that it was involved in the accident. However, the theory that the truck was not involved in the collision was not vigorously pursued on appeal. The judge’s conclusion that the truck was the vehicle that caused the collision was well-supported by all of the circumstantial evidence.
 
In short, Mr. Kooner’s key argument is that there was another available inference on the evidence, namely, that someone else was driving and Mr. Kooner was merely a passenger when the truck was involved in the collision. He says the judge erred in not recognizing this available inference which was inconsistent with guilt. He says inferences consistent with innocence do not have to arise from proven facts, citing Villaroman at paras. 35–36.
 
Respectfully, I am not persuaded by this argument. 
 
As pointed out by the Crown, the judge was not required to identify, explore, and resolve every conceivable and imagined possibility; rather, he only needed to consider reasonable possibilities and plausible theories based on logic and experience, arising from the evidence or absence of evidence: Villaroman at para. 37. 
 
The possibility that someone else might have driven the white truck and that Mr. Kooner was the mere passenger, is not plausible when all of the evidence is considered. There was nothing arising on the evidence that could suggest that someone else was in the vehicle with Mr. Kooner. 
 
The judge’s conclusion that he was satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Kooner was the driver was well supported by the evidence. After Mr. Multani followed the vehicle and noted that it pulled off the road, he saw Mr. Kooner standing near it and no one else in the vicinity. Mr. Kooner had a key that opened and started the vehicle. The white truck was badly damaged, with red paint marks in the damaged area, consistent with the colour of Mr. Wong’s vehicle even though no forensics were performed. The arriving police officer did not see anyone else on the street either. The police dog tracked from the spot where Mr. Kooner was seen on the street to where he was hiding in the bushes.
 
Contrary to the appellant’s arguments on appeal, it was unnecessary for the judge to consider the remote possibilities that there could be more than one key to the vehicle or the vehicle had a push start, and that, because of these factors, Mr. Kooner might have only been the passenger. Nor was it necessary for the judge to contemplate the existence of another person driving the truck, merely because the dog did not start tracking from the driver’s seat of the vehicle. All of the evidence in combination was so compelling that it was simply not plausible that there could have been another driver. 
 
The judge concluded that he was “satisfied that the only rational inference to be drawn from the totality of the evidence is that Mr. Kooner was the driver”. Further, the judge added that there was “no other reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence”: at para. 25. 
 
The judge’s conclusion is a finding of fact and entitled to deference on appeal. The trial judge’s role is to decide whether there are available reasonable alternative inferences that raise a doubt, or whether the arguments advanced simply amount to speculative possibilities and, ultimately, the trial judge’s assessment can only be set aside where it is unreasonable: see Nguyen at para. 23; Villaroman at para. 71. 
 
The judge’s conclusion that Mr. Kooner was the driver was reasonable and it has not been shown that he committed a palpable and overriding error in his appreciation of the evidence: R. v. Clark, 2005 SCC 2 at para. 9.
 
Therefore, there is no ground to interfere with the judge’s conclusion that the Crown proved beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Kooner had the care and control of a vehicle involved in an accident with another vehicle, and failed to stop his vehicle and provide assistance or identify himself, with the intent to escape civil or criminal liability. 

Sufficiency of Evidence that Mr. Kooner Knew the Accident Caused Bodily Harm
 
It was proven that persons were injured in the collision caused by Mr. Kooner’s driving. Mr. Wong’s evidence was that, immediately after the collision, he was feeling sore all over but particularly in both knees and his right hip. His right hip was badly bruised, turning purple and black in colour, which he assumed was from the pressure of the seatbelt in the collision. Also, his knees were sore for a few weeks, with the left knee continuing to cause him some trouble. He had no broken bones or a head or neck injury. Mr. Wong’s injuries constitute “bodily harm” within the definition of the Criminal Code.
 
Ms. Baah’s injuries were more serious, which included broken ribs and injured fingers requiring surgery. These injuries also constitute “bodily harm”.
 
This gives rise to the next question on appeal, namely, whether the evidence was sufficient to establish that Mr. Kooner knew that the accident caused bodily harm, a necessary element of s. 252(1.2). The appellant says that the evidence was not sufficient and, at most, if unsuccessful on the first ground of appeal, he should only have been convicted of leaving the scene of an accident, contrary to s. 252(1). 

The judge’s conclusion regarding Mr. Kooner’s knowledge was succinct. He found at paras. 38–39: 
 
It would have been clear to Mr. Kooner that he had been involved in a serious motor vehicle accident. Mr. Multani described hearing the sound of the accident and observing dust and smoke. The vehicle driven by Ms. Baah flipped over onto its roof. The vehicle driven by Mr. Wong was damaged in the accident. There was extensive damage to the front of Mr. Kooner’s vehicle. 
 
I am satisfied that Mr. Kooner’s actions of driving away from the scene of the accident, parking on 96 Avenue and fleeing into the wooded area is consistent with his knowledge of the accident. It would have been clear that the drivers of the other vehicles suffered bodily injury due to the extent of the accident.
 
Mr. Kooner argues that, in using the language “it would have been clear” at paras. 38 and 39, the judge applied a “must have known” test, which wrongly applied objective knowledge rather than finding that Mr. Kooner, subjectively, had actual knowledge. 
 
I disagree. The judge did not have the benefit of testimony from Mr. Kooner so he had to draw conclusions about what he actually knew based on the whole of the evidence as to the nature of the accident and Mr. Kooner’s conduct. The fair reading of the judge’s reasons shows that the phrase “would have been clear” was used by the judge to indicate that he was drawing an inference when concluding that Mr. Kooner had actual knowledge.
 
Trial reasons should be read generously, as a whole, with the presumption that the judge knows the law: R. v. Gerrard, 2022 SCC 13 at para. 2; R. v. G.F., 2021 SCC 20 at paras. 69, 74. 
 
In my view, the judge’s choice of words “it would have been clear”, read in the context of the reasons as a whole, indicate that the judge decided that Mr. Kooner’s actual knowledge of bodily harm was based on the circumstantial evidence of the force of the accident as well as Mr. Kooner’s choice to flee. 
 
Driving his own vehicle aggressively, Mr. Kooner hit a vehicle that was travelling down the same road. The impact had great force, as proven by the extensive damage to his own vehicle (made clear by photographs in evidence) and by the fact that it propelled Mr. Wong’s vehicle into oncoming traffic, colliding with another vehicle. A driver who hits another vehicle with significant force knows that he has done so. The judge’s finding that Mr. Kooner had this knowledge did not need amplification. 
 
Actual knowledge was also consistent with wilful blindness in these circumstances. The judge was aware of the principles by which actual knowledge can be found based on wilful blindness, noting in his discussions with counsel during submissions that this Court had discussed it in a recent hit-and-run case, the case of R. v. Edwards, 2020 BCCA 253. 

As explained in Edwards, an accused can be found to have the requisite actual knowledge to establish mens rea where the circumstances make the accused aware of a need to make some inquiry, but the accused fails to make the inquiry because the accused does not wish to know the truth: at para. 74. In Edwards, Willcock J.A. held: 
 
The test is stated nicely in R. v. Farmer, 2014 ONCA 823 by Sharpe J.A. (at para. 26): the accused must have “shut his eyes because he knew or strongly suspected that looking would fix him with knowledge” or because he became “aware of the need for some inquiry [yet] decline[d] to make the inquiry because he [did] not wish to know the truth”.
 
In R. v. Morrison, 2019 SCC 15, Moldaver J. for the majority described the heightened level of suspicion as follows:
 
Wilful blindness exists where an accused's “suspicion is aroused to the point where he or she sees the need for further inquiries, but deliberately chooses not to make those inquiries”: R. v. Briscoe, ... at para. 21 (emphasis in original). Wilful blindness has been characterized as “deliberate ignorance” because it connotes “an actual process of suppressing a suspicion”: D. Stuart, Canadian Criminal Law: A Treatise (7th ed. 2014), at p. 261. “A court can properly find wilful blindness only where it can almost be said that the defendant actually knew”: Briscoe, at para. 23, citing G. Williams, Criminal Law: The General Part (2nd ed. 1961), at p. 159. This Court has repeatedly held that if an accused is found to be wilfully blind, that state of mind may substitute for actual knowledge: Sansregret v. The Queen, ... at pp. 584-85; Briscoe, at para. 21. Indeed, it is “equivalent to knowledge”: Briscoe, at para. 23, citing Williams, at p. 159. [Emphasis in original.]
 
The hit-and-run cases referred to by counsel suggest a suspicion sufficient to cause the accused to believe he should make further enquiries before leaving the scene of a collision meets the “heightened suspicion” test.
 
This was not a case of a driver hitting a parked vehicle, not knowing that there was someone inside the vehicle. Nor was it a case where there was a minor bump between cars moving slowly, such as when navigating around a parking lot. 
 
For purposes of considering the appellant’s best argument on this ground of appeal, I will presume that Mr. Kooner may not have seen the vehicle he hit collide with another vehicle, causing the second vehicle to flip over. Nevertheless, the noise and smoke of the collision, Mr. Kooner’s decision to keep driving away despite knowing he hit the first vehicle as it was moving and having had no sign that the vehicle had safely stopped, and Mr. Kooner’s decision to flee, all support the conclusion that Mr. Kooner was wilfully blind to all the indications that he caused a serious accident in which people were injured. 
 
It was reasonable for the judge to infer from these facts alone that Mr. Kooner knew he caused bodily harm to the occupant of Mr. Wong’s vehicle. It is common sense and common experience that a motor vehicle impact with this degree of force leads to injury.
 
Importantly, the definition of bodily harm in the Criminal Code is any hurt or injury that interferes with the health or comfort of a person and is more than merely transient or trifling. Minor injuries interfering for a short time with a person’s comfort were found to constitute bodily harm, including small bruises, swelling and headaches: R. v. Dixon, (1988), 42 C.C.C.(3d) 318, 1988 CanLII 2824 (Yuk. C.A.) at para. 45, cited in R. v. Bulldog, 2015 ABCA 251 at para. 44; R. v. C.K., 2001 BCCA 379 at paras. 7–9. 
 
In conclusion, even if only his vehicle’s impact with Mr. Wong’s vehicle is considered and Mr. Kooner is presumed not to have seen the consequential collision with the vehicle driven by Ms. Baah, in my view, it was open to the judge to infer that Mr. Kooner knew that the other person in the car he directly hit suffered some injury and discomfort that met the test of bodily harm within the definition of the Criminal Code. At a minimum, the force of the collision made it obvious to Mr. Kooner that he should stop and make inquiry, and he did not do so because he did not want to know the truth. On the facts as found by the judge, Mr. Kooner can be deemed to have actual knowledge.
 
I am of the view that the appellant has not established a basis to interfere with the judge’s conclusion that Mr. Kooner was guilty of leaving the scene of an accident, knowing that bodily harm was caused to another person, contrary to what was then s. 252(1.2) of the Criminal Code. 

Disposition
 
I would dismiss the appeal.


./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/ca/2023bcca6.html

The appellants, Kasra Mohsenipour and Tamim Albashir, operated an “escort” service in Vancouver and Edmonton. Following a 38-day trial by judge alone in the Supreme Court, they were found guilty of multiple offences involving three complainants who worked for them. For part of the relevant period, one of the complainants was under 18. The unpublished reasons for conviction are indexed as 2018 BCSC 736. The appellants did not testify at their trial.

The judge found that the appellants’ interactions with the complainants included threatened and actual violence. He found that they exercised significant control over the complainants and exploited them. The appellants were found guilty of what is commonly referred to as “human trafficking”.

The appellants challenge all of their convictions, other than a conviction for attempting to obstruct justice by offering money to one of the complainants not to testify against them. They allege multiple errors in principle that they say irreparably tainted the judge’s reasoning process, credibility assessments, and his management of the trial. Relying on fresh evidence, the appellants say the trial was unfair because they were wrongly denied disclosure that was relevant to challenging the credibility of the complainants and to otherwise making full answer and defence. The appellants further apply for leave to raise a constitutional issue on appeal, alleging that the human trafficking offence in the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 [Code] is overbroad, vague and otherwise constitutionally infirm. Notice has been provided under the Constitutional Question Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 68.

Finally, the appellants submit that if their convictions are sound, the judge nonetheless erred in not conditionally staying some of them on the basis of R. v. Kienapple, 1 S.C.R. 729, 1974 CanLII 14 (SCC) [Kienapple].

For the reasons that follow, I would allow the appeals, but only for the purpose of conditionally staying four of the appellants’ convictions based on Kienapple. The remainder of the convictions should remain intact. 

Background

For convenience, a chart setting out the charged offences, the dates of the offences, and the sentences imposed is attached as “Appendix A” to these reasons. 

The offences were committed between May 2013 and August 2016. Legislative change occurred during that period. The Code’s prostitution-related offences were amended effective December 6, 2014.

In R. v. Mohsenipour, 2020 BCCA 160, aff’d R. v. Albashir, 2021 SCC 48, a Crown appeal from acquittal involving these same appellants and the same facts, Justice Bennett explained the amendments:
 
… all prostitution-related offences were moved from Part VII of the Criminal Code, “Disorderly Houses, Gaming and Betting”, to Part VIII, “Offences Against the Person and Reputation”. As well, the amendments criminalized, for the first time in Canadian history, the purchase and advertisement of sexual services: see ss. 286.1 and 286.4. These legislative changes reflected Parliament’s newly minted stance towards prostitution as a sexually exploitative practice, fraught with risk, which disproportionately impacts women and girls. No longer would prostitution be viewed and treated as merely a public nuisance, as it had been in the previous iteration of the Criminal Code. 
 
[Parliament] repealed s. 212 [of the Code] and created the “material benefit offence” in s. 286.2 … [Emphasis added.]

Because of the amendments, some of the charges against the appellants were split in two. Conduct that pre-dated December 6, 2014, was charged using the predecessor provisions. Conduct that occurred after December 6, 2014, was prosecuted under the amended provisions.
 
The changes to the Code were enacted in response to Canada (Attorney General) v. Bedford, 2013 SCC 72 [Bedford]. In that case, the Supreme Court struck down several prostitution-related offences for contravening s. 7 of the Charter. This included s. 212(1)(j) of the Code, which prohibited living on the avails of prostitution.
 
At the trial, the judge quashed two counts on the indictment that charged the appellants under s. 212(1)(j) (counts 6 and 13). He did so because he found that although the appellants committed these offences while Bedford’s declaration of non-constitutionality was suspended, they could not be convicted and sentenced for an offence that did not meet constitutional requirements.
 
The Crown appealed that ruling. This Court allowed the appeal and entered convictions for both counts: 2020 BCCA 160. The convictions on counts 6 and 13 now form part of this appeal, with the appellants challenging their validity on different bases.

In the course of her reasons in 2020 BCCA 160, Justice Bennett summarized the factual background of the appellants’ case. For present purposes, that summary provides sufficient context for understanding the appellants’ interactions with two of the three complainants — KC and SC:
 
Mr. Mohsenipour, Mr. Albashir, and one Omar Alameddin headed an “escort” operation in which the complainants KC, SC, and NV provided sexual services to clients for money while the men financed and orchestrated logistics. They rented the premises from which the complainants worked; arranged and paid for website advertisements; provided transportation, supplies, and security; and organized the time and place for meetings with prospective clients. Mr. Mohsenipour and Mr. Albashir collected the proceeds derived from the operation and paid the complainants after deducting their percentage of the profits. 
 
Mr. Albashir contacted KC in 2014. He expressed an interest in becoming her pimp together with his partner Mr. Mohsenipour. They agreed to terms whereby KC would receive 40% of the monies paid for sexual services and Mr. Albashir would receive 60%. In exchange, Mr. Albashir would provide supplies, advertisements, transportation, security, a location, and clients. 
 
In the ensuing years, KC worked at various locations in the Lower Mainland. At one point, the operation shifted to Edmonton for a short time. 
 
Mr. Albashir was violent towards KC. On one occasion, he struck her in the face and caused a black eye. On another, he grabbed her by the throat, threw her to the ground, and placed his knee on her face. 
 
KC complained to the authorities in April 2016.
 
SC had heard about Mr. Albashir through her relationship with KC. Eventually, she and Mr. Albashir met. They discussed the terms of an escorting arrangement and she began taking clients immediately. Again, the respondents financed and organized all aspects of the operation.
 
After three weeks, SC wanted out of the business. She missed her family. She left the condominium supplied by the respondents and returned to her former home. Within a matter of days, and following multiple demands from the respondents, SC moved to a location in downtown Vancouver with KC and resumed escorting. 
 
Like KC, SC worked at multiple locations in Vancouver between 2014 and 2016. She also moved to Edmonton for a period of time with the others. SC’s relationship with the respondents was marked by the threat of violence, both physical and psychological.
 
SC provided a statement to the police in July 2016. …
 
On December 22, 2016, the Crown charged Mr. Mohsenipour, Mr. Albashir, and Mr. Alameddin with 18 counts of prostitution-related offences, and one count of obstructing justice. Counts six and 13 alleged that the men lived on the avails of the prostitution of KC and SC, contrary to s. 212(1)(j), from March 15, 2014 to December 5, 2014, and May 15, 2014 to December 5, 2014, respectively. Mr. Mohsenipour and Mr. Albashir were also charged under s. 286.2(1), the new material benefit offence, for conduct committed after December 6, 2014—when the replacement provision came into force.
 
Mr. Alameddin failed to appear at trial, but the Crown nonetheless proceeded against Mr. Mohsenipour and Mr. Albashir in his absence. Following the close of the Crown’s case, Mr. Mohsenipour sought leave to apply to quash counts six and 13 on the indictment. 
 
On January 29, 2018, Mr. Justice Masuhara issued oral reasons for judgment addressing the merits of the case as well as Mr. Mohsenipour’s motion to quash.
 
The third complainant, NV, met the appellants in May 2013. She was 15 years old. A short time later, she began to work for the appellants, providing sexual services to men from an apartment in downtown Vancouver. She would collect the fees and give the money to the appellants. NV received a third of these funds. NV also performed sex work on “out calls”. The appellants transported NV to and from these calls.
 
In August 2013, the appellants were made aware that NV was underage. She continued to work for them. In February or March 2014, NV went to live with a boyfriend; however, the relationship did not last and she returned to the appellants. At the time, she was addicted to heroin. She continued to provide sexual services. Her interaction with the appellants stopped again in 2014.
 
In the fall of 2015, Mr. Albashir arranged for NV to return to work for the appellants. She did so and in January 2016, she moved into a downtown Vancouver condominium. The financial and working conditions remained the same as before. A few weeks later, she left after an argument with Mr. Albashir and that was the end of her interaction with the appellants. NV testified that on one occasion while involved with the appellants, Mr. Albashir confronted her with what looked like a gun. This was in response to NV asking permission to take her mother out for lunch. She was told that she had to work and that she “belonged” to Mr. Albashir.
 
NV provided a statement to the police in October 2016. 

Trial Judgment
 
The reasons for judgment are lengthy, consisting of 383 paragraphs. It is not necessary that I refer to the sections of the judgment that address the conviction for attempting to obstruct justice (count 19), or the motion to quash counts 6 and 13 on constitutional grounds. Neither of those matters are relevant to the appeal.
 
The judge began his reasons by identifying the nature of the evidence called at the trial and various legal principles he was invited to apply. This included the concept of party liability under ss. 21(1) and (2) of the Code. He then turned to “evidentiary matters” that required his attention, including application of the co-conspirator exception to the rule against hearsay evidence: R. v. Wang, 2013 BCCA 311 at para. 48, leave to appeal ref’d, 35539 (19 December 2013).

The judge was satisfied that the Crown had proved the existence of a conspiracy in this case: at para. 32. He found that the “evidence establishe[d] a common intention” between the appellants and a third accused, Omar Alameddin, to engage in a money-making “joint venture” in which the three men:
 
… recruited girls and young women to work for them as “prostitutes”, exercised control and direction over them and exploited them with the intent of using the money earned by these girls and young women to finance their own lifestyles which included designer clothing, regular gym workouts, rental of luxury downtown condos, expensive cars and delivered meals.

At para. 31 of his reasons, the judge summarized the evidence in support of a conspiracy. This summary and the implied findings of fact ultimately played an integral role in the analysis of whether the Crown had met its burden of proof on individual counts. As such, I will excerpt the findings in their entirety: 

• Mr. Albashir and Mr. Mohsenipour, the two accused, met with N.V. together when an offer of working as an escort for them was extended to her. 
• The two accused together met with C.H. when an offer of working as an escort for them was extended to her. 
• The two accused together took N.V. to Surrey Central mall to buy her a cell phone. 
• The two accused, Mr. Albashir and Mr. Mohsenipour, rented the apartment at 111 West Georgia St. together, and both of their names and signatures appear on the lease. 
• Mr. Albashir and Mr. Mohsenipour were together when N.V. was picked up from her home and taken to the apartment at 111 West Georgia St. 
• Mr. Albashir and Mr. Mohsenipour were together when C.H. was taken to the mall to purchase lingerie. 
• Mr. Albashir and Mr. Mohsenipour were together during the photo shoot for N.V. and C.H. from which photos were used for ads for N.V. and C.H.’s sexual services. 
• Mr. Albashir and Mr. Mohsenipour lived with N.V. and C.H. in the apartment at 111 West Georgia St. and stayed in the living room of the apartment while the girls provided sexual services to men directed to the apartment by both accused. 
• They collected all the money earned by C.H. and N.V. from providing sexual services. 
• They together drove N.V. and C.H. to “outcalls”. 
• They were together, along with Mr. Alameddin, in the lobby at 111 West Georgia St. when N.V. was arrested on August 6, 2013. 
• Mr. Mohsenipour and Mr. Alameddin spoke to the police together in the lobby of the apartment after N.V.’s arrest. 
• The two accused spoke to the police together outside 111 West Georgia St. on August 6, 2013; and left together after their interaction with police. 
• The two accused and N.V. stayed in hotels after her arrest on August 15, 2013. Mr. Mohsenipour paid for one hotel using his credit card. 
• Mr. Albashir and Mr. Mohsenipour together were stopped by police numerous times in 2013 and 2014 in one or the other’s vehicle. On several occasions, there was a young woman in the car with them, and on two occasions, the woman identified as “Lexi” or [SP] was in the car. Lexi or [SP] was identified by K.C. as a fellow escort who worked for the two accused. Seen in the light of the rest of the evidence, the only logical inference to be drawn from these circumstances is that the accused were transporting her to or from an “outcall”. 
• On January 2, 2014, the police stopped all three men with “Lexi”/[SP] in the 2006 infinity registered to and driven by Mr. Albashir. 
• On May 20, 2014, at 2:00 a.m. in the morning, the police stopped Mr. Albashir and Mr. Alameddin in Mr. Albashir’s black Mercedes after seeing them enter and then exit 588 Broughton Street. 
• On June 12, 2014, all three men were stopped together in the black Mercedes. 
• The two accused were together in the apartment at 588 Broughton St. when K.C. came to meet Mr. Albashir for the first time. 
• The two accused were living together in a nearby apartment. 
• They came together to the apartment at 588 Broughton to collect money earned by “Nebs” and K.C. from providing sexual services. 
• They together drove K.C. and “Lexi” to outcalls. 
• Mr. Alameddin and Mr. Albashir were together when S.C. met Mr. Albashir for the first time. 
• Mr. Alameddin and Mr. Albashir took S.C. on the first day she met them to an apartment in Mr. Alameddin’s name and, as will be addressed later, procured her into prostitution. 
• S.C. was "working” for Mr. Alameddin, though she believed from what she observed that Mr. Albashir was the "boss”. 
• S.C. gave evidence of a hierarchy among the three men with Mr. Albashir at the top, followed by Mr. Mohsenipour and then Mr. Alameddin. 
• Both Mr. Alameddin and Mr. Albashir contacted S.C. after she left the first time and was convinced to return. 
• Mr. Albashir, Mr. Mohsenipour, and Mr. Alameddin were together at 588 Broughton Street when S.C. was told that she would now be working for Mr. Mohsenipour. 
• Mr. Albashir and Mr. Mohsenipour and the complainants, K.C. and S.C., went to Alberta together, where both women worked providing sexual services to dates arranged by the two men. 
• Mr. Albashir and Mr. Mohsenipour lived together in another apartment while in Edmonton. 
• Mr. Albashir and Mr. Mohsenipour came to collect money from K.C. and S.C. daily and together drove them to and from outcalls in Edmonton. 
•Mr. Mohsenipour was present when Mr. Albashir assaulted and threatened K.C. 
• Albashir was present when Mr. Mohsenipour assaulted and threatened S.C. 
• Mr. Albashir and Mr. Mohsenipour together assaulted “Nebs” another escort who was involved with the men. 
• Mr. Albashir and Mr. Mohsenipour were together when they reported the car registered to Mr. Albashir stolen in Edmonton. 
• Mr. Albashir and Mr. Mohsenipour drove K.C. and S.C. to and from outcalls together when they returned to Vancouver in 2015. 
• Mr. Albashir and Mr. Mohsenipour were together with K.C. and [SF] when they went to Edmonton in the fall of 2015. 
• Mr. Albashir and Mr. Mohsenipour drove K.C. and [SF] to outcalls together in Edmonton. 
• Mr. Albashir and Mr. Mohsenipour were together in a 2003 Mercedes when stopped in Edmonton in December 2014. 
• Mr. Albashir and Mr. Mohsenipour together picked up N.V. from Mr. Schafer’s home in late December 2015 or early January 2016. 
• Mr. Albashir and Mr. Mohsenipour lived together in the apartment building where Mr. Albashir was arrested in April 2016. 
• Text messages between Mr. Mohsenipour and Mr. Albashir evidenced by phone records. 
• Text messages between K.C. and Mr. Mohsenipour and K.C. and Mr. Albashir. 
• Business communications between the two accused via text. 
• Handling of each other’s escorts. 
• Recorded conversations between Mr. Albashir and Mr. Mohsenipour while Mr. Albashir was in North Fraser Pretrial. 
• Text messages between K.C. and Mr. Alameddin in April 2016. 
• Contacts in telephone phones. During an analysis of phone seized from the two accused, 458 common phone numbers were found (i.e., a number on at least one of Mr. Albashir’s phones was also found on at least one of Mr. Mohsenipour’s phones). 
• Albashir and Mr. Mohsenipour worked together to bump ads and to house their escorts. K.C. identified certain exhibits as her escort ads.

After listing this evidence, the judge provided his “overall” interpretation of the “escort” service operated by the appellants:
 
Overall, the evidence indicates that Mr. Albashir, Mr. Mohsenipour and Mr. Alameddin worked with the complainants at varying times. They arranged for the rental of premises from which the escorts would work. They arranged for photographs to be taken of the complainants for website ads and made the ads on websites for escort services. The men would pay for the ads related to the complainants to be “bumped”. They would provide the supplies such as condoms, lubricants and wipes for the escorts. They would also provide transportation for the escorts to and from out calls. They also were responsible for responding to calls from prospective clients and arranged the time and place for the call. They also purported to provide security to the escorts when needed. They collected the money from the escorts and paid the escorts after deducting their take. Mr. Mohsenipour and Mr. Albashir drove high end vehicles, lived in a condo in downtown Vancouver, and received gifts from the escorts. They appear in the evidence to be fit and muscular men. My assessment of the evidence is that the role of Mr. Albashir, Mr. Mohsenipour, and Mr. Alameddin come within the general definition of a “pimp”.
 
At this point, the judge turned to the individual counts on the indictment, assessing the credibility of each complainant and the evidence specific to the counts that involved them.
 
The judge found each of the complainants to be credible. In assessing credibility, he considered the frailties of their evidence. Despite the frailties, he was satisfied he could rely on their evidence about their dealings with the appellants.
 
NV was 19 at the start of the trial. The judge acknowledged lapses in her memory; her addiction to heroin and cocaine; past and current charges for criminal offences (including robbery using a knife); her reluctance to testify; and her history of lying. NV was in custody when she testified, awaiting sentencing for one or more offences.
 
KC was 27 when she testified. At times, she had little to no recall. There were also times that she was “adversarial, argumentative, unresponsive to questions, and detached” while giving her evidence. She admitted to robbing a client with the appellants. Before the trial, KC agreed to disavow her sworn statements to the police in exchange for $5,000 from the appellants and received half of the money in advance. She later told the police about this arrangement and did not recant. KC regularly used crystal methamphetamine, including while appearing in court. She engaged in welfare and tax fraud by not declaring her income as a sex worker. There were omissions in her statement(s) to the police.
 
SC was 27 when she testified. The judge was also alive to SC’s testimonial frailties. She found it difficult to give evidence and displayed “angry outbursts” in the courtroom. She had lapses in recall. Details emerged at the trial that were not contained in her statement to the police.
 
Relying on the complainants’ testimony and confirmatory evidence where available, the judge found both appellants guilty of counts 1–3, 6–11 and 13–19 of the indictment. Mr. Albashir was also found guilty of counts 4–5 and 12 (Mr. Mohsenipour was not charged in these counts). I do not consider it necessary to detail the evidence surrounding each count. Where specifics are required, they will be addressed in the course of analyzing the grounds of appeal. 

Issues on Appeal
 
Between the two of them, the appellants raise nine grounds of appeal. They allege that the judge: 

a) did not properly apply the co-conspirator exception to the rule against hearsay evidence; 
b) erred in his application of party liability under s. 21(2) of the Code; 
c) erred in his assessment of the complainants’ credibility; 
d) rendered an unreasonable verdict on the charge of procuring NV; 
e) erred in his interpretation and application of s. 279.01(1) of the Code (the human trafficking offence); 
f) erred in his analysis of the offence of receiving a material benefit from human trafficking under s. 279.02(1); and, 
g) erred in failing to enter conditional stays for some of the convictions based on Kienapple.
 
Both appellants also allege that their trial was unfair because of non-disclosure of information they say was relevant to challenging the credibility of the complainants and otherwise making full answer and defence. They also contend that the judge mishandled this aspect of the proceeding and committed related errors in principle. In support of this ground of appeal, the appellants apply to introduce fresh evidence.
 
Finally, Mr. Albashir seeks leave to raise a constitutional issue for the first time on appeal. Depending on the manner in which s. 279.01(1) of the Code is interpreted by this Court, Mr. Albashir says the provision contravenes s. 7 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms [Charter]. Mr. Mohsenipour does not seek to raise this issue; however, if leave is granted and the constitutional issue is decided in favour of Mr. Albashir, any remedy granted under s. 52 of the Constitution Act, 1982, being Schedule B to the Canada Act 1982 (U.K.), 1982, c. 11, would logically inure to Mr. Mohsenipour’s benefit.
 
If successful on their appeals, the appellants seek to have their convictions overturned on all counts other than the count for attempting to obstruct justice, and acquittals entered. In the alternative, they seek a new trial. In the further alternative, they seek conditional stays for some or all of the convictions entered on counts 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13, 14, 15 and 16 of the indictment. 

Discussion
 
I will address each ground of appeal in turn. The appellants filed separate factums on the substantive issues raised in their respective appeals, and a joint factum addressing the disclosure issue. In seeking new trials, they rely on their own material, as well as the issues raised and arguments made by their co-appellant. For the purpose of these reasons and for ease of reference, I will treat each ground of appeal as having been raised by both.
 
Before addressing the merits of the grounds of appeal, it is important to say something about appellate review of a trial judge’s reasons. 

Reasons are Reviewed Functionally and Contextually 

Reasons for judgment are assessed applying a functional and contextual approach. This means they must be read as a whole and in the context of the live issues at the trial, informed by the positions taken by the parties. They must also be read “with sensitivity to the trial judge’s role and advantage in making findings of fact and credibility”: R. v. G.F., 2021 SCC 20 at para. 5.

Appellate review must not consist of a “technical search for error”: G.F. at para. 5. Where “ambiguities in a trial judge’s reasons are open to multiple interpretations, those that are consistent with the presumption of correct application must be preferred over those that suggest error”: G.F. at para. 79, citing R. v. C.L.Y., 2008 SCC 2 at paras. 10–12. “It is not enough to say that a trial judge’s reasons are ambiguous — the appeal court must determine the extent and significance of the ambiguity”: G.F. at para. 79. Reasons must be read “generously” and “with the presumption that the judge knows the law”: R. v. Gerrard, 2022 SCC 13 at para. 2.

Finally, it is necessary also to say something about the sufficiency of a trial judge’s reasons. The appellants have not advanced this issue as a stand alone ground of appeal. However, throughout their submissions, both in writing and at the hearing of the appeal, they raised concerns about the judge’s use of conclusory statements in his reasons and a lack of substantive analysis on various legal or evidentiary issues.
 
A functional and contextual review of a trial judge’s reasons recognizes that judges need not advert to every piece of evidence in explaining their pathway to conviction, address every conflict or issue raised by the parties, reconcile every alleged evidentiary frailty, or detail and explain each of the material findings: R. v. R.E.M., 2008 SCC 51 at paras. 15–20, 48–57.

Nor are judges required to “demonstrate [in their reasons] their knowledge of basic criminal law principles”: G.F. at para. 74. As explained in R.E.M.: “… The sufficiency of reasons is judged not only by what the trial judge has stated, but by what the trial judge has stated in the context of the record, the issues and the submissions of counsel at trial”: at para. 37, italics removed. The question to ask is whether the “foundations for the trial judge’s conclusions” are discernable. If the answer is “yes”, then the “functions of reasons for judgment are met”: R.E.M. at para. 37. 

Were the Appellants Unfairly Deprived of Disclosure?
 
It is appropriate to start the analysis of the appeals with the disclosure complaints. If the appellants succeed on this ground of appeal, it would result in an order for a new trial and obviate the need to address the other issues raised by them.
 
The appellants make two disclosure complaints:

(a) non-disclosure that is said to have deprived them of the ability to make full answer and defence, rendering their trial unfair; and
(b) errors in principle by the judge in managing disclosure.
 
The disclosure at issue involves two distinct subjects: First, the conduct of Detective Constable Jim Fisher, a member of the Vancouver Police Department (“VPD”), who participated in the investigation of the appellants and has since resigned from the police force. While engaged in the investigation, Mr. Fisher was himself the subject of a covert police investigation for alleged sex crimes against sex workers, as well as other offences. Five months before the start of the appellants’ trial, Mr. Fisher was charged with criminal offences arising from the latter investigation. Mr. Fisher eventually pleaded guilty to some of those offences and was sentenced to 20 months’ imprisonment: R. v. Fisher, 2019 BCCA 33. Second, information about communication between NV, KC and SC and investigators, and money received by them.
 
The appellants wanted access to the investigative materials surrounding the allegations against Mr. Fisher (the “Fisher Investigation”). Some of this material was provided by the Crown before their trial. The appellants subsequently brought disclosure applications for additional material. Only partial disclosure was ordered and it was not until this appeal that the appellants received copies of three Reports to Crown Counsel that were prepared in the Fisher Investigation (the “RTCCs”). The RTCCs summarize the investigation and the evidence against Mr. Fisher.
 
The appellants say the judge mismanaged their requests for disclosure specific to the Fisher Investigation. He is said to have erred by:

(a) acceding to a Crown request to defer an application for additional material until after NV completed her testimony;
(b) failing to order disclosure of the Fisher Investigation RTCCs;
(c) inadequately reviewing redactions of material that was ordered disclosed; and 
(d) failing to order disclosure of text messages and Facebook messages between Mr. Fisher and complainants and a witness in the Fisher Investigation until the end of the appellants’ trial.
 
The appellants also complain that the Crown failed to comply with a disclosure order made by the judge in relation to the Fisher Investigation, to the appellants’ detriment.
 
The second category of disclosure consists of emails and/or text messages between police investigators in the appellants’ case and NV, KC and SC. This material has been disclosed on appeal and reveals, among other things, that NV, KC and SC received money for certain expenses while the investigation was ongoing. The funds were provided to them under the auspices of “Project Connect: Building Connections within our Communities”. This is a program administered by the VPD that provides outreach services to sex workers who wish to leave the industry. Between April 2016 and September 2017, NV received $172.39 from the program. KC and SC received $633.65 and $543.80, respectively.
 
In support of their disclosure ground of appeal, the appellants have filed a fresh evidence application which consists of an agreed statement of facts setting out the chronology of the impugned disclosure, and various pieces of disclosure received by them in the trial court and after they filed their notices of appeal. 

Relevant Legal Principles

As explained in R. v. Moazami, 2021 BCCA 328 [Moazami (2021)], an appeal from conviction that raises non-disclosure as a ground of appeal and is accompanied by a fresh evidence application is governed by the principles established in R. v. Dixon, 1 S.C.R. 244, 1998 CanLII 805 (SCC) and R. v. Taillefer, 2003 SCC 70. The Court stated in Moazami (2021):
 
First, where there is undisclosed information by Crown, or otherwise misconduct by the state, the onus is on the accused to demonstrate that there is a reasonable possibility that the verdict might have been different but for the Crown’s failure to disclose all of the relevant evidence, or other misconduct, as the case may be. In Dixon, the Court held that: “[i]mposing a test based on a reasonable possibility strikes a fair balance between an accused’s interest in a fair trial and the public’s interest in the efficient administration of justice”: at para. 34. 
 
Application of the first branch of the Dixon test requires that “the appellate court determine that there was a reasonable possibility that the [trier of fact], with the benefit of all of the relevant evidence, might have had a reasonable doubt as to the accused’s guilt”: Taillefer at para. 82. This means constructing an “overall picture of the evidence…that would have been presented to the [trier of fact]”, having regard to the evidence in its entirety: ibid. 
 
Second, and regardless of whether there is no reasonable possibility of a different verdict at the first stage of the test, the appellate court must inquire as to whether there is a reasonable possibility that the failure to disclose affected the overall fairness of the trial process: Taillefer at para. 83. This means a reviewing court must consider the potential usefulness of the fresh evidence to the defence, which “must be based on reasonably possible uses of the non‑disclosed evidence or reasonably possible avenues of investigation that were closed to the accused as a result of the non‑disclosure”: Taillefer at para. 84, citing Dixon at para. 34, emphasis in original. The appellate court must assess whether the failure to disclose deprived the accused of certain evidential or investigative resources: Taillefer at para. 84. [Italic emphasis in original; underline emphasis added.] See also R. v. Johnston, 2021 BCCA 34 at paras. 263–269.
 
The Court went on to say that “if the fresh evidence, being reliable and relevant, demonstrates a reasonable possibility that the outcome or overall fairness of the trial process was affected, then the evidence will be admitted”: Moazami (2021) at para. 67, emphasis added.
 
Before applying these principles to the issues raised by the appellants, it is important to understand the chronology of relevant disclosure events at their trial. 
 
Requests for Disclosure of the Fisher Investigation
 
The appellants’ trial began on June 8, 2017.
 
Before it started, the Crown provided the appellants with information specific to the Fisher Investigation. The appellants received:

(a) notice that in December 2016, Mr. Fisher had been charged with sexual exploitation (three counts); sexual assault; breach of trust and obstruction of justice; and
(b) police statements provided in the Fisher Investigation by each of NV, KC and SC.
 
In her statement, NV said she had known Mr. Fisher for a “very long time”. During their interaction, he asked her some “weird questions” about her personal life, including questions about her sexual relationships. She thought the questions were “odd”. However, Mr. Fisher had never given NV money. Nor was there anything intimate or sexual between them.
 
KC described Mr. Fisher as a “nice guy” and said she “never expected” the allegations against him. She did not think he was a “bad guy” based on her dealings with him and she found the allegations “shocking”. KC had never met with Mr. Fisher alone and he had never given her money. He had never asked her to lie or to change her evidence in any way.
 
SC also described Mr. Fisher as “very nice”. She did not feel “like he was a bad person at all”. He had never given her money. He never asked her to change her testimony. There was never anything sexual between them. He did not try to have an unprofessional relationship with her. Nor did he “creep [her] out” or make any kind of “weird comments” to her. SC was “really shocked” about the allegations against him.
 
On the first day of the trial, the Crown provided the appellants with copies of the charging document(s) sworn against Mr. Fisher.
 
That same day, and before NV testified, defence counsel raised the issue of outstanding disclosure with the judge. Defence counsel told the judge that among other things, they had asked the Crown for a copy of any RTCC produced in the Fisher Investigation. They had also requested disclosure of any “undocumented [off the record] contact” between Mr. Fisher and the complainants in this case. Defence counsel said they were concerned that Mr. Fisher had “inappropriate contact” with NV, KC and SC, and that he “tried to bribe them or that he tried to influence their evidence, and [that] this happened off the record”. Defence counsel told the judge that the Crown declined to provide the requested information and, as a result, the defence would be applying for disclosure.
 
Defence counsel said they had an agreement with the Crown that the application for additional material in the Fisher Investigation would proceed after NV began her testimony, but before she was cross-examined. However, the Crown had since changed its position and no longer wanted NV’s testimony to be interrupted. The defence asked the judge to rule that NV’s cross-examination must await the disclosure application, which was scheduled for June 16, 2017.
 
The Crown responded by saying that since its initial discussion with the defence about interrupting NV’s evidence, it had learned that there was no contact between Mr. Fisher and the three complainants in this case that “revealed interactions of concern”. NV, KC and SC each provided statements in the Fisher Investigation. None of them spoke of “any attempts by Fisher to influence them or bribe them or any[thing] of that sort”. Nor did the statements “reveal any contact with Detective Fisher outside of the contact they had with him during the course of … the investigation into the matter before the [judge]”. The Crown had also reviewed the then-existing RTCC(s) in the Fisher Investigation and “found no reference to any of the three complainants in [this] case”. It did not plan on calling Mr. Fisher as a witness at the appellants’ trial.
 

It was on this basis that the Crown no longer agreed to adjourn NV’s cross-examination to await the defence disclosure application. The Crown was of the view that it had disclosed everything from the Fisher Investigation that was “obviously relevant” to the case against the appellants. There was: … no evidence that [NV] had … undocumented contact with … Jim Fisher. There [was] no evidence that she had contact with him outside of … contact during the course of her interviews with police in connection with this matter when there were other police officers present, except when she went outside to have a smoke during an interview, and that fact and the circumstances of that fact are recorded in her statement to the investigators …
 
When making this submission, the Crown pointed out that if the defence succeeded in its application for additional disclosure after NV testified, she could be recalled as a witness to address anything that arose from the material.
 

On June 9, 2017, the judge ruled that NV’s evidence should not be interrupted and she should complete her testimony before the disclosure application: … I have reviewed the materials. I know there is … an application which [defence counsel] is going to bring forward, but from the perspective of the materials that have been disclosed and the submissions and discussion I had yesterday with counsel, I am of the view that we will, following the direct examination of the witness, move to the cross-examination. Any other steps that are required, should the application for disclosure be successful, can be dealt with at that time …
[Emphasis added.]
 
The disclosure application was heard on June 16, 2017. By this time, NV’s cross-examination had finished. The judge reserved his decision. On June 19, he granted part of the disclosure application: 2017 BCSC 2577.
 
In his reasons, the judge noted the defence position that the sought-after disclosure was relevant to the credibility and reliability of the complainants. The defence argued that it “may tend to show that Fisher subverted the investigative process and counselled [NV, KC and SC] or otherwise influenced or impacted their evidence …”: at para. 4. The judge was persuaded that transcripts of statements made by two complainants and a witness in the Fisher Investigation (who were not complainants in this case), and transcripts of intercepted telephone conversations between Mr. Fisher and those same individuals should be produced: at para. 10. However, he directed that “any aspects requiring redaction with respect to privacy interests be made …”: at para. 10. In response to questions posed by the judge, defence counsel indicated that “… if there [were] passages where the complainants [in the Fisher Investigation] describe how they were sexually assaulted …”, the defence was “not interested” in them: at para. 24.
 
On June 26, 2017, the Crown disclosed further information from the Fisher Investigation. This included redacted copies of statements provided to the police by the two complainants and witness in that investigation, and various intercepted conversations. At this time, KC was in the midst of cross-examination. Her cross-examination finished on June 28.
 
On July 18, the defence advised the judge that they would be asking to have the redactions reviewed. By this time, SC had begun her testimony. Her direct examination started on June 29, 2017. It was interrupted until July 17 and completed on July 20.
 
On July 20, the judge agreed to review the redactions. On August 11, 2017, he was provided with the unredacted versions of the disclosed material, along with a memorandum prepared by the Crown explaining the redactions. A copy of the memorandum was also provided to the defence.
 
Around that same time, the defence received further material arising out of the Fisher Investigation that had not been disclosed in follow-up to the June 19, 2017 order. This disclosure consisted of additional intercepts between Mr. Fisher and a complainant in the Fisher Investigation, as well as a second part of a statement provided by that same complainant.
 
On September 11, 2017, the judge addressed his review of the redactions. He found that the redactions were “largely appropriate”. Subject to specific requests for follow-up that he made of the Crown, the judge was satisfied that the Crown’s vetting was “reflective of what [he] indicated in [his earlier] ruling”.
 
On September 12, 2017, the Crown provided the defence with amended redactions specific to the police statements taken from the Fisher Investigation complainants and witness. As I understand it, these amendments flowed out of the September 11 hearing.
 
The issue of disclosure was again before the judge on October 17, 2017. The defence claimed that the Crown had failed to comply with the judge’s directions from September 11 and sought further material from the Fisher Investigation. This material consisted of alleged text messages between Mr. Fisher and the complainants and witness in the Fisher Investigation. By this time, the Crown had closed its case and defence counsel had informed the judge that neither appellant would be calling evidence at the trial.
 
In its October 17 submissions, the Crown disagreed with the defence that the judge had ordered disclosure of text messages involving the complainants and witness in the Fisher Investigation.
 
The next day, on October 18, the judge informed counsel that he had reviewed his disclosure rulings and the related documents, and was satisfied that his orders for disclosure did not include the text messages sought by the defence. It is apparent from the record that he was mistaken about this fact.
 
At this point, the defence brought a formal application for disclosure of text messages between Mr. Fisher and two complainants in the Fisher Investigation (ZC and HW); Facebook messages between Mr. Fisher and those complainants; and “any other communications between Detective Fisher and those … complainants”. The defence sought this same material in relation to interactions between Mr. Fisher and ES, who was a witness in the Fisher Investigation. Defence counsel justified the disclosure request on the basis that the messages may show there was an “abuse of process” involving Mr. Fisher; an obstruction of justice or “some subversion of the process”; or, the messages might contain discussion about the appellants. This application was brought the day closing submissions were set to begin in the appellants’ trial.
 
The judge made a partial disclosure order on October 18, 2017. His reasons are indexed as 2017 BCSC 2684. The judge ordered that the Crown disclose any text messages, Facebook messages or emails that referenced the appellants, or any aliases they were known to have, for the period of 2013–2016.
 
On October 20, the Crown provided the defence with seven pages of electronic messages that fell within the scope of the judge’s ruling. 
 
The appellants were convicted of their offences on January 29, 2018.
 
After they filed notices of appeal, the Crown provided the appellants with copies of three RTCCs prepared in the Fisher Investigation. This material was provided without conceding its relevance. The RTCCs are dated November 28, 2016, February 24, 2017 and May 1, 2017, respectively.
 
On appeal, the Crown also disclosed emails from police officers involved in the investigation of the appellants, as well as some text messages between investigators and the complainants in this case.
 
It is common ground that at no point during the trial did the appellants apply to recall any of NV, KC or SC for the purpose of cross-examination arising from the disclosure they received in relation to the Fisher Investigation. Nor did they seek to call Mr. Fisher as a witness. 

Parties’ Positions on Appeal
 
The appellants contend that the disclosure sought from the Fisher Investigation was first party disclosure and the Crown was duty bound to provide it to them in accordance with the principles established in R. v. Stinchcombe, 1 S.C.R. 754, 1995 CanLII 130 (SCC) and R. v. McNeil, 2009 SCC 3.
 

From their perspective, information from the Fisher Investigation was patently relevant to their case. They summarize the purported relevance in their factum (at paras. 68, 74, 81–82): … the profile of the Fisher victims matched the profile of the Trial Complainants … the temporal nexus between Fisher’s criminal acts and his role in the investigation of the appellants was very strong … the information sought was necessary so the defence could have an understanding of Fisher’s modus operandi of exploitation, so as to explore the credibility and reliability of the Trial Complainant’s evidence and, potentially, to support an abuse of process claim. …
… a police officer who played a significant part in the case was charged with crimes, allegations of egregious breach of trust, sexual exploitation, and sexual assault against multiple sex trade workers who were witnesses in prosecutions of pimping offences. And this was a pimping prosecution. And these complainants had contact with that same officer within the same time frame. …
The case for disclosure was very strong … serious charges had been brought against Fisher … Fisher’s role in the investigation was not peripheral – he was lead investigator on some counts, was an affiant with respect to searches whose fruits the Crown sought to lead, and N.V. had testified he likely improperly influenced her evidence …
 
The appellants say the Crown’s failure to disclose, the manner in which the judge handled the related applications (including deferring the first one until after NV testified), the piecemeal production from the Fisher Investigation, and the heavy redactions, individually and in their cumulative effect, deprived the appellants of their right to “meaningful, usable and timely disclosure, and violated their rights under s. 7 of the Charter”. They contend that information from the Fisher Investigation could have been used to meet the Crown’s case against them, advance a defence, or make a decision that could have affected the conduct of their defence. The material they did receive is said to have come too late and was so heavily redacted that it was of no use.
 
As noted, there is a second category of non-disclosure with which the appellants take issue. It consists of information about money that was received by NV, SC and KC from the police during the investigation of the appellants. The appellants received disclosure of this material after they filed their notices of appeal.
 

The appellants contend that this material also constitutes first party disclosure and the Crown should have provided it to them before the trial. In their factum, they contend that the information (at paras. 95 and 97): … demonstrate[s] that financial benefits were provided to the Trial Complainants by the VPD and that there was a very significant degree of communication before and at trial between the [investigators] and the Trial Complainants. The texts reveal that the Trial Complainants discussed with [police] members requests for money for lawyers, tattoo removal, and other identified and unidentified needs, prior to and during the trial. Disclosure was particularly necessary given the context, which was that the Trial Complainants were vulnerable women who struggled with substance abuse, and the [investigative unit] was Fisher’s police unit when his misconduct occurred. …
The text messages and emails also reveal a large number of otherwise undocumented contacts between the Trial Complainants and investigators, numerous interactions not contained in the officers’ notes or other disclosed documents. Given the context of [the investigative unit], the shadow cast by Fisher’s criminal misconduct, and the case generally, the non-disclosure of such information also breached disclosure rights.
 
The Crown says the only information from the Fisher Investigation that was conceivably relevant to the appellants’ case was information from that file that directly involved NV, KC or SC, or the appellants. Everything else was irrelevant. Moreover, given the fact that the records sought by the defence arose in the context of an unrelated criminal investigation, they were properly characterized as third party records and subject to the disclosure regime established in R. v. O’Connor, 4 S.C.R. 411, 1995 CanLII 51 (SCC). In seeking disclosure, the appellants did not comply with that regime. See also R. v. Quesnelle, 2014 SCC 46 at paras. 11–13; R. v. Gubbins, 2018 SCC 44 at paras. 18–29; R. v. Schirmer, 2022 BCCA 214. 
 
The Crown accepts that in accordance with Stinchcombe, it was mandated to provide to the appellants any non-privileged or non-statutorily protected fruits of the investigation specific to them, as well as any material outside of that investigative file that was obviously relevant and in the possession of the prosecuting Crown or, once made aware of its existence, reasonably available to the prosecuting Crown through inquiries: Stinchcombe, McNeil, Quesnelle, Gubbins and Schirmer.
 
The Crown says the fact that Mr. Fisher had been criminally charged did not automatically make information surrounding those charges a first party record and therefore subject to the Crown’s mandatory disclosure obligation. In McNeil, the Supreme Court held that an accused does not have an entitlement to “automatic disclosure of every aspect of a police officer’s employment history, or to police disciplinary matters with no realistic bearing on the case”: at para. 53, emphasis added. It is for this reason that investigative files involving third parties and police disciplinary records usually fall to be determined under the O’Connor regime: R. v. Moazami, 2020 BCCA 3 at para. 41 [Moazami (2020)].
 
The Crown says that at the trial, the appellants bore the onus of establishing the likely relevance of the additional material they sought from the Fisher Investigation and now raise as an issue on appeal. They did not do so. As such, at the trial and now on appeal, they have actually received more than what they were properly entitled to. The Crown emphasizes that in this appeal, the appellants bear the onus of showing a reasonable possibility that the verdicts might have been different had there been greater disclosure from the Fisher Investigation, or a reasonable possibility that the non-disclosure affected the overall fairness of their trial. They say the appellants are not able to meet that test.
 
The Crown submits that the material the appellants sought from the Fisher Investigation would not have made any difference. Nor did the manner in which the judge handled the disclosure issues render the trial unfair. The only substantive nexus between the two investigations that was asserted by the appellants at the trial consisted of an allegation that Mr. Fisher was the individual who introduced NV to the appellants for the purpose of sex work and, by so doing, potentially laid a foundation for a defence of entrapment. On appeal, the appellants withdrew this allegation, acknowledging there was no evidence to support it.
 

The Crown says the appellants’ disclosure request was (and remains) grounded in speculation and an unsupported theory that because Mr. Fisher sexually exploited sex worker complainants in another case, inappropriately shared information with them and was prepared to obstruct justice, he must have engaged in that same conduct here and influenced NV, SC and KC’s evidence in a way that not only undermined their credibility and the reliability of what they testified to, but provided a basis from which to seek constitutional relief, including a potential stay of proceedings for abuse of process. The Crown’s response to this position is stated thusly in its factum (at paras. 63–65): The appellants do not assert that any link [other than the now-abandoned allegation of possible entrapment] exists between Fisher’s offences and the issues at trial. The Fisher Complainants were not witnesses at [the appellants’] trial, and nothing that occurred between Fisher and [those complainants and the witness] involved the appellants, the charges, or their investigation by police. …Fisher was not a witness at [the appellants’] trial. While his role in the investigation of the appellants was not peripheral, it was nonetheless confined to specific tasks. Of those tasks, he met each of the complainants and interviewed two of them, but no misconduct occurred. Fisher was the lead investigator for the obstruction investigation, count 19, which was proven by K.C.’s evidence and jail calls obtained through two judicial authorization written by him. However, count 19 has not been substantively challenged on appeal. In any event no impropriety has been identified in Fisher’s applications for those authorizations, or otherwise in his investigation of the appellants, much of which was marginal … Given that Fisher’s offences were entirely extrinsic to the convictions under appeal and the underlying investigation, the details of Fisher’s offences were not relevant at trial.
 
In relation to the second category of non-disclosure — information about money received by NV, SC and KC from the VPD — the Crown acknowledges that in R. v. Johnston, 2019 BCCA 107, it was held that the “promise of any benefits or special treatment pre-trial, can bear on the witnesses’ motives and states of mind during trial testimony, and whether those inducements influenced them to shape their testimony”: at para. 90, citing Palmer v. The Queen, 1 S.C.R. 759, 1979 CanLII 8 (SCC) at para. 32. However, the Crown says that the money provided to the complainants in this case consisted of small amounts, formed part of a funded program to assist sex workers in exiting the industry, and could not reasonably have impacted the complainants’ motives for testifying against the appellants or their states of mind at the trial. Even if this information had been disclosed, there is no reasonable possibility it could have affected the verdicts. 

Analysis
 
In resolving this ground of appeal, I will consider five issues:

(a) the legal regime that properly governed the appellants’ request for material from the Fisher Investigation;
(b) the nature and content of the material they received;
(c) the nature and content of the material that was not disclosed to them;
(d) whether the appellants have established a reasonable possibility the verdicts would have been different but for the non-disclosed material; and
(e) whether they have established a reasonable possibility the non-disclosure affected the overall fairness of the trial.
 
In my view, if the appellants cannot show a reasonable possibility that the verdicts would have been different but for the non-disclosure, or a reasonable possibility that the non-disclosure affected the fairness of the trial, it is dispositive of this ground of appeal.
 
The inability to meet this test would render their fresh evidence inadmissible. Moreover, the disclosure errors alleged to have been committed by the judge and the Crown, even if shown to have some merit, would be inconsequential because the material the appellants say those errors deprived them of could not realistically have affected the verdicts or rendered their trial unfair. 

What Disclosure Regime Governed?
 
At no point during the disclosure applications did the judge determine the appropriate regime that applied to the requests for access to the Fisher Investigation. As correctly noted by the appellants, he made no reference to the governing legal principles; did not identify what party bore the burden on the applications; nor did he set out the standards he was bound to apply.
 

From my review of the record, it is apparent Crown counsel believed that once they disclosed the fact of criminal charges against Mr. Fisher, and any Fisher Investigation material directly involving NV, KC, SC, or the appellants, they had complied with their first party disclosure obligation. Records beyond that fell subject to O’Connor principles (or, possibly, s. 278.3 of the Code). The Crown filed written submissions for the purpose of the June 16, 2017 disclosure hearing. Paragraphs 2–3 of the submissions read this way: The Crown is opposed to this application on the grounds that the appropriate foundation has not been laid to establish the likely relevance of the Fisher investigation to the accused in this prosecution … The first party disclosure that both fairness and the Stinchcombe principles require, as well as the police misconduct disclosure that both fairness and the principles in McNeil require, have already been made. Any further disclosure application relating to the Fisher Investigation is an application for third party disclosure and should properly be made pursuant to Regina v. O’Connor … [Emphasis added.]
 
Defence counsel saw the issue differently. They viewed the Fisher Investigation records as first party records and took the position that the Crown was obliged to produce what they were asking for unless able to show that the information was privileged, clearly irrelevant or otherwise governed by law: McNeil at para. 18.
 
It is unfortunate the judge did not resolve this issue. As recently noted in Schirmer at paras. 51–52, clarifying whether records sought by the defence are properly characterized as first or third party records carries important process and onus implications. See also World Bank Group v. Wallace, 2016 SCC 15 at paras. 112–115 and R. v. Stipo, 2019 ONCA 3 at paras. 78–89.
To gain access to third party records, the defence must apply for those records and serve notice on the relevant record holders, along with a subpoena (unless waived), requiring that the records be brought to court for possible review: Schirmer at para. 54, citing O’Connor, McNeil at para. 27 and Gubbins at para. 25.

Once the records are before the court, the defence must then show they are “likely relevant” to an issue raised at the trial or to testimonial competency. If the defence meets this onus, the court will review the records, assess them for actual relevance, and balance relevant competing interests: Schirmer at para. 54, citing McNeil at para. 35. It is only once this process has been completed that the records may then be produced to the defence, in whole or in part.
 
Establishing “likely relevance” is not an onerous burden; however, it does require consideration by the trial judge. Assessing whether the defence has met its onus enables the judge to properly fulfill their role as a gatekeeper in preventing unmeritorious or time-consuming disclosure applications. Adhering to the requirements of the O’Connor regime also ensures a properly informed assessment and weighing of relevant competing interests.

As explained in Gubbins (at paras. 26–27): Information will be “likely relevant” where there is “a reasonable possibility that the information is logically probative to an issue at trial or to the competence of a witness to testify”: O’Connor, at para. 22 (emphasis deleted). The “likely relevant” threshold has been described as significant, but not onerous: O’Connor, at para. 24; McNeil, at para. 29. The reason that the relevance threshold is “significant” is to allow the courts to act as gatekeepers, preventing “speculative, fanciful, disruptive, unmeritorious, obstructive, and time consuming” requests for production: O’Connor, at para. 24, quoting R. v. Chaplin, 1995 CanLII 126 (SCC), [1995] 1 S.C.R. 727, at para. 32. Nevertheless, the burden on the accused is not onerous. “Likely relevance” is a lower threshold than “true relevance”, and has a “wide and generous connotation” that “includes information in respect of which there is a reasonable possibility that it may assist the accused in the exercise of the right to make full answer and defence”: McNeil, at para. 44; see also O’Connor, at para. 21. Only after information has been shown to be likely relevant will the courts assess the actual relevance of the record sought. The courts then consider competing interests at the second stage of an O’Connor application: McNeil, at para. 39. It may be apparent “upon inspection by the court that the claim of likely relevance established at the first stage of the O’Connor application is simply not borne out”: McNeil, at para. 40. [Emphasis added.]

I am of the view that the Fisher Investigation records not directly involving NV, KC, SC or the appellants were third party records and should have been treated as such. They arose in the context of an unrelated prosecution and, importantly, they involved allegations of sexual exploitation and sexual assault made by complainants or witnesses who were not in any way involved in the appellants’ case, and for whom the materials in the Fisher Investigation likely gave rise to reasonable expectations of privacy. An informed balancing of countervailing interests was required.
The appellants suggest in their factum that although the defence did not oppose the details of Mr. Fisher’s sexual assaults being redacted from material provided to them, these details were disclosable “in law”. Respectfully, this is not a correct statement of the law that governs records of this nature.
 
At paras. 33–39 of Quesnelle, the Supreme Court acknowledged that police occurrence reports (or RTCCs), which is what the appellants wanted access to: … may reveal family status, health information (including statements concerning mental health or the use of drugs and alcohol), and details about housing and employment. They may reveal personal conflicts or details about relationships between individuals … Moreover, they very often reveal the extent of an individual’s engagement with the criminal justice system. Most significantly, they can reveal previous instances where the witness or complainant has been the victim of criminal activity, including previous sexual assaults. The disclosure of the information described above engages complainants’ and witnesses’ “[i]nformational privacy”, “the claim of individuals, groups, or institutions to determine for themselves when, how, and to what extent information about them is communicated to others” … The disclosure of police occurrence reports that contain intimate personal information ― such as details of previous allegations of sexual assault ― may do particularly serious violence to the dignity and self-worth of an affected person. …

Where an individual voluntarily discloses sensitive information to police, or where police uncover such information in the course of an investigation, it is reasonable to expect that the information will be used for the purpose for which it was obtained: the investigation and prosecution of a particular crime. Similarly, it is reasonable to expect individual police officers to share lawfully gathered information with other law enforcement officials, provided the use is consistent with the purposes for which it was gathered. [Internal references omitted.]

In deciding that the additional material sought by the defence constituted third party records, I have found Moazami (2020) instructive. Information arising out of the Fisher Investigation was also at issue in that decision, albeit within the context of an application for production on appeal. It is not necessary to detail the whole of the background in Moazami. Suffice it to say that on appeal, the Crown disclosed considerable information from the Fisher Investigation to Mr. Moazami. He had been convicted of numerous prostitution-related offences. Mr. Fisher was involved in the investigation against Mr. Moazami. Importantly, unlike the situation before us, one or more of the complainants in the Fisher Investigation were also complainants or witnesses in Mr. Moazami’s trials. There was obvious overlap between the two prosecution files.

Notwithstanding that connection, this Court held that Mr. Moazami was not entitled to the entirety of the material relating to the Fisher Investigation.

The Crown had voluntarily disclosed all “underlying investigative materials concerning any of the complainants in the Fisher [I]nvestigation who were also complainants or witnesses in the Moazami trials”: at para. 51, emphasis added. Mr. Moazami took the position that this was not enough and there was likely other material from the Fisher Investigation that could assist in his appeals. Accordingly, he applied for a “complete inventory” of the file: at para. 32.

Mr. Moazami’s application was dismissed. This Court was not persuaded that the Crown had failed to discharge its first party disclosure obligations on appeal: at para. 59. As a result, if Mr. Moazami wanted further disclosure from the Fisher Investigation, he was required to bring an O’Connor application: at para. 60.

In this case, the Crown disclosed to the defence all of the Fisher Investigation material that directly involved NV, KC and SC. This included statements provided by each of NV, KC and SC in the Fisher Investigation: 2017 BCSC 2577 at paras. 7–9. The remainder of the material sought by the defence related to allegations made against Mr. Fisher by complainants or a witness who were not involved in the appellants’ case. Consistent with the ruling in Moazami (2020), and the treatment of police occurrence reports in Quesnelle, I consider the additional material sought by the appellants to have fallen outside of the Crown’s first party disclosure obligation. Consequently, it was subject to the O’Connor disclosure regime.

Before us, the appellants repeated the submission they made at the trial, namely, that because Mr. Fisher had been charged with serious criminal offences and was a member of the team that investigated the appellants, the Fisher Investigation material should have been disclosed to them by the Crown without prompting. From their perspective, Mr. Fisher’s involvement in their case and, importantly, his engagement with NV, KC and SC as witnesses who were as equally vulnerable as the complainants in the Fisher Investigation, automatically entitled them to know the circumstances underlying the allegations against him.

This position erroneously presupposes that the mere fact of disciplinary proceedings or allegations of criminal conduct against a police officer who participated in an investigation engages the Crown’s first party disclosure obligations. This is not correct at law and overstates the effect of McNeil. Under McNeil, police disciplinary records or allegations of criminal conduct only constitute first party disclosure when they have a “realistic bearing” on the case: McNeil at para. 53. When these records are produced as part of the Crown’s first party disclosure obligation, it is as an “exception to the general rule that police records are third party records”: Moazami (2020) at para. 41, emphasis added.

The argument that the impugned records were first party records also fails to account for the nature of those records, the reasonable expectations of privacy that likely attached to them, and the obvious need for a balancing of relevant competing interests prior to disclosure.

These records did not form part of the “fruits of the investigation” into the appellants’ criminal conduct. They were not “acquired by means and in consequence of that investigation”: R. v. Jackson, 2015 ONCA 832 at para. 93, leave to appeal to SCC ref’d, 36829 (30 June 2016). As helpfully explained by Justice Watt in Stipo:

The term “fruits of the investigation” refers to police investigative files, not to operational records or background information. In other words, the term describes information generated or acquired during or as a result of the specific investigation into the charges against the accused. This information may relate to the unfolding of the narrative of material events, the credibility of witnesses or to the reliability of evidence that may form part of the case an accused is required to meet: Gubbins, at para. 22; Jackson, at paras. 92–93.

Nor were the RTCC(s) in the Fisher Investigation, the statements of the complainants and witness involved in that investigation, or communication between Mr. Fisher and those individuals, “obviously relevant” to the appellants’ case. To meet this standard, a record need not be potentially decisive of an issue at the trial: Stipo at para. 120. However, the relevance must be clear or self-evident: Schirmer at para. 64. As explained in Stipo:

The Supreme Court has stressed that “obviously relevant” does not create a new standard or degree of relevance: Gubbins, at paras. 23 and 36. Nevertheless, the term should be understood with reference to the stage of the process at which the relevance inquiry takes place. Unlike in the second step of the O'Connor application, the court will not have the records before it for examination. Therefore, the relevance of the records must be “obvious” without such examination. 87

 No one suggests that every police record is subject to the first party disclosure regime of Stinchcombe: see, for example, McNeil, at para. 59. It follows that the third party disclosure regime of O’Connor occupies a vital role for disclosure of records which are neither part of the investigative file nor obviously relevant and thus fall outside the first party disclosure regime: Gubbins, at para. 24. [Emphasis added.]
 
When defence counsel first explained to the judge why they wanted material from the Fisher Investigation beyond that already provided by the Crown, they said they were concerned about “inappropriate contact” between Mr. Fisher and NV, SC and KC. They contended that the Fisher Investigation would assist the defence in exploring whether Mr. Fisher “tried to bribe [NV, KC or SC] or … tried to influence their evidence, and [that] this happened off the record”.
 
At the time of this submission, NV, KC and SC had each provided a statement in the Fisher Investigation denying that anything like this had occurred. The Crown had also reviewed the then-existing RTCC(s) in the Fisher Investigation and there was no reference to NV, KC or SC. Furthermore, the Crown had determined that it would not be calling Mr. Fisher as a witness at the appellants’ trial.
 
In this context, it is not clear to me how information surrounding interactions between Mr. Fisher and other complainants or a witness in an unrelated prosecution was “obviously relevant” to the appellants’ case, even with the undeniable reprehensibility of his conduct. There was no evidentiary grounding for a suggestion of inappropriate relationships or undue influence between Mr. Fisher and NV, KC or SC. Other than the statements they provided in the Fisher Investigation (which had been disclosed), there was no discernable nexus between the two prosecutions. I do not consider it unreasonable, in these circumstances, for the Crown to have adopted the position that it had met its Stinchcombe obligations and the additional material sought by the defence did not constitute first party disclosure. It was rational for the Crown to determine there was no reasonable possibility that the additional material would assist the appellants in making full answer and defence: McNeil at para. 44.

Ultimately, the judge ordered that the appellants receive some, but not all of the requested information from the Fisher Investigation. He did so on the basis that this information was necessary for “full answer and defence”: 2017 BCSC 2577 at para. 10. Although the judge did not identify the disclosure regime to which he was giving effect, nor the principles he applied in reaching this determination, for purposes of this appeal, I will assume it was the O’Connor framework and will treat the judge’s conclusion as a finding that the appellants were able to meet the test of “likely relevance”, specific to the material that was ordered to be disclosed. (The Crown also raised s. 278.3 of the Code in the court below. Whether that regime was also engaged by these records is best left to another day.)

I will also assume that the judge assessed the actual relevance of this same material and decided the issue in favour of the appellants; again, specific to that which was disclosed. Finally, in directing that the Crown redact the material he ordered disclosed for privacy interests, I will assume the judge engaged in a balancing of relevant competing interests as required under the O’Connor framework, which would have entitled him to order only partial disclosure.
 
In their factum, the appellants say there is no legal support for witness statements to be “pruned” in the manner that occurred here. They also contend that if this Court affirms the approach taken here: … it [will] be open to the Crown in all cases to redact witness statements in the same manner, line-by-line, and disclose to the defence only butchered, skeletonized versions, or versions that need to be “stitched together” by combining the unredacted content from the different accounts given of the same incident.

In my view, this contention overstates the implications of the judge’s ruling given the context in which it was made and, importantly, is grounded in an erroneous presupposition that the sought-after material from the Fisher Investigation constituted first party records. ZC, HW and ES were not involved in the appellants’ trial.

The Crown suggests in its factum that there was no basis for the judge to order disclosure of material from the Fisher Investigation and that he erred in his assessment of “likely relevance”. Although I consider the Crown’s position to have considerable merit (for reasons that will become apparent), I do not consider it necessary to answer this question in resolving the first ground of appeal. Rather, it is sufficient to address the matter on the basis of the complaints advanced by the appellants, namely, that the disclosure they received from the Fisher Investigation was grossly insufficient, and that the deprivation of disclosure and the manner in which the defence applications were handled by the judge rendered their trial unfair. 

What Did the Appellants Receive?

To address these latter issues, it is important to first understand what the appellants received prior to the completion of their trial, specific to the Fisher Investigation.

They received disclosure of Mr. Fisher’s role in the investigation against them, including his interactions with NV, KC and SC, and his role in any statements taken from them.

They received statements provided by NV, KC and SC in the Fisher Investigation.

The appellants knew that on December 29, 2016, Mr. Fisher was charged with a number of offences, including sex offences, breach of trust and obstructing justice. On the first day of their trial, they received a copy of the then-sworn charging document(s), which would have identified the offences, their timeframes, and the alleged victims.

After NV’s testimony, the appellants received redacted statements from two complainants (ZC and HW), and from a witness (ES), in the Fisher Investigation, and redacted intercepts of conversations between some of these individuals and Mr. Fisher. The unredacted portions of the material revealed that in addition to allegations of sexual offending, Mr. Fisher was said to have: 

• chatted with ZC “everyday over text”, offered her tickets to the PNE, bought her something from Starbucks a couple of times, and given her a book about someone’s struggle with addiction; 
• told ZC that someone had reported to the police that they had “slept together” and, as a result, “internal may be investigating [him]”. Mr. Fisher coached ZC on what to say if contacted about the situation. Among other things, he told her “how to say that … [she] didn’t know what [they were] talking about”; or that she was “high” at the time or that it never happened; and, 
• given advice to HW about how to cover up a violent crime or to lie about it and, on another occasion, was said to have interfered with an Alberta investigation involving HW, resulting in the police in that jurisdiction letting her go.

The unredacted portions also revealed that: 

• from HW’s perspective, Mr. Fisher was “shady. Always [doing] illegal shit”. He gave her information about “people and stuff” that he was not authorized to do. He would run licence plates for her, tell her about ongoing investigations and was always “like creeping, like looking at all the girls that [were] working with [her]”; 
• if HW “needed … a pimp or something”, she would ask Mr. Fisher and he would give her names. She would then “go hit them up”. This included the appellants; and, 
• Mr. Fisher gave ES money from time to time and, on one occasion, offered to get her marijuana. He “totally made [her] feel like [she] could just call him and ask him for anything”, but, at the same time, he “made [her] feel like [she] owed him …”.

In their combined effect, the fact of sworn allegations of sexual misconduct and the unredacted portions of alleged victims’ statements in the Fisher Investigation provided the appellants with a basis from which to cross-examine the complainants in this case about their interactions with Mr. Fisher and the presence of sexual or otherwise inappropriate conduct between them, including attempts by Mr. Fisher to influence their testimony or counsel untruthfulness.

Indeed, NV, KC and SC were asked questions about their relationships with Mr. Fisher when they testified.

Salient portions of NV’s testimony include the following: 

• NV said she had known Mr. Fisher for about six years; 
• She saw him multiple times after their first meeting and every time she was arrested for an offence (other than shoplifting); 
• Mr. Fisher would ask her “weird questions” when other police officers were not around, including questions about her sexual history, her personal life and her relationship with Mr. Albashir; 
• He would not act this way when he was in the presence of others; 
• Mr. Fisher’s questions made NV uncomfortable and it was “creepy”; 
• At one point in her testimony, NV said that Mr. Fisher never attempted to influence her. But later, she agreed with defence counsel that it was “possible” and “very likely” that Mr. Fisher had suggested to her what she should say at the trial, but that she just did not remember he had done so. She agreed that Mr. Fisher would say “bad things” about Mr. Albashir; 
• Upon further questioning, NV agreed again that it was likely Mr. Fisher had influenced her statement about the appellants, and that she just did not remember this fact because of her heroin use; 
• However, in re-examination, NV testified that nothing she said in her statement to police about the appellants was something that Mr. Fisher told her to say; 
• Mr. Fisher never gave her money. Nor did he send her text messages or emails; and, 
• She was surprised that he was charged with sex offences.

KC’s testimony also addressed Mr. Fisher. This included the fact that: 

• She was never alone with Mr. Fisher (although later, she said she could not remember if she was); 
• She was never given any money by him; 
• She gave her phone number to Mr. Fisher, as well as another police officer, so that she could keep in touch with them and she contacted Mr. Fisher for updates on Mr. Albashir’s bail. She confirmed that she had Mr. Fisher’s number in her address book. She said she did not communicate with Mr. Fisher on social media and he never contacted her outside of the case; 
• Mr. Fisher did not tell her what to say before giving her statements to the police. She was told by him that there would be consequences if she changed her statement and she thought the consequence would be going to jail. He never asked her to “scrub” anything from a statement; 
• She had a “pretty comfortable” relationship with Mr. Fisher and trusted him. She did not find it difficult to talk openly with him. He never asked her strange questions about her personal life. He did not treat her differently when the cameras were off versus when they were on when she provided statements; and, 
• Nothing inappropriate happened between them. He never bribed her, asked her to change her evidence or offered to pay her for sex.

SC was asked questions about Mr. Fisher when she testified. She said that: 

• She never asked Mr. Fisher for money, nor did she receive any from him; 
• He never told her what she should say or tried to influence her evidence. He did not suggest that she say things that would help the case against the appellants; 
• She had contact with Mr. Fisher by phone and through a Facebook account. She had since deleted her Facebook exchanges with him, but not because there was something inappropriate about the messages. The messages were strictly professional; 
• He never said or did anything inappropriate to her; and, 
• He did not tell her things to say that would help the case against the appellants.

It is apparent from this evidence that with the disclosure received by the appellants, they were able to canvass with NV, KC and SC their interactions with Mr. Fisher, the frequency and the nature of those interactions, and the extent to which Mr. Fisher may have attempted to influence their testimony.

The appellants contend that because of the heavy redactions, the material they received from the Fisher Investigation “resulted in a false picture being painted of Fisher as a kindly fellow whose interactions with the Fisher Complainants were largely benign”. I fail to see how that is so. Fisher had been charged with sex offences, breach of trust and obstructing justice. The unredacted portions of the statements taken from alleged victims of those offences described more than one form of improper conduct, including giving money and gifts to them; telling ZC about what to say if she was contacted by the police about his behaviour; counselling HW on how to cover up a violent crime; and improperly sharing information with them. This was not “benign”.

The redacted statements from the Fisher Investigation were disclosed after NV’s testimony. However, it had been made clear to the appellants that if they had further questions for NV arising out of material they obtained as a result of their disclosure applications, they could apply to recall her. At no point did they do so. On appeal, the appellants say it was “an error for [them] to have closed their cases with the disclosure issue outstanding”. But, they do not raise the ineffective assistance of counsel as a ground of appeal. As such, it is equally plausible that this was a strategic or tactical decision on the part of the defence. 

What was Not Disclosed to the Appellants?

The appellants did not receive full copies of the statements provided by the two Fisher Investigation complainants and witness. Nor did they receive a copy of any RTCC related to that investigation.

They also did not receive disclosure of certain emails or other forms of communication between some of the police officers who were involved with the investigation against the appellants, nor material showing that NV, KC and SC received money from the VPD.

I have reviewed the non-disclosed material that forms part of the fresh evidence application and which the appellants rely upon in support of this ground of appeal.

The non-disclosed information specific to the Fisher Investigation is predominantly, if not exclusively, focused on that investigation. A not insignificant portion of this material is also focused on Mr. Fisher’s sexual misconduct. At the trial and on appeal, the appellants have acknowledged that the details surrounding Mr. Fisher’s sexual offences were not “critical” to them making full answer and defence.

The RTCCs summarize: 

• the content of statements taken from complainants and witnesses in the Fisher Investigation, including their descriptions of: the period of time they knew and interacted with Mr. Fisher; when and where that interaction occurred; their perceptions of his obsessive or fixated behaviour towards them or other young sex workers, including the extent and nature of his communication with them; gifts or money he provided to them; his overall participation and influence in their lives, including accompanying them to medical or other appointments; details of sexual contact with him, including the exchange of sexual contact for money; when and where the sexual contact took place; and inappropriate things said by Mr. Fisher, or information shared by him, including sexual comments; 

• the content of statements taken from witnesses who received disclosures from the Fisher Investigation complainants and witness, including observations they made of them following sexual contact with Mr. Fisher and/or Mr. Fisher’s interaction with these individuals in the presence of these witnesses; 
• details of evidence gathered by the police that corroborated the Fisher complainants’ and witness’s narratives, including confirmation of dates, places and events referred to in their statements; 
• details of one or more crimes alleged to have been committed by HW and Mr. Fisher’s advice to her on how to cover up that crime; 
• details of Mr. Fisher’s attempt to interfere with, side track or manipulate an investigation into his own conduct, including coaching at least one complainant in that investigation on what to say and offering a quid pro quo in exchange for her co-operation; 
• details of the investigative methodology employed in the Fisher Investigation, including using two complainants as police agents and intercepting conversations between them and Mr. Fisher; 
• the content of statements taken from some of Mr. Fisher’s co-workers; 
• the content of information downloaded from one or more of Mr. Fisher’s phones and the phone(s) of one or more of the complainants or witness; 
• conclusions reached by investigators on the legal relevance and probative value of evidence gathered against Mr. Fisher; and, 
• the bases on which investigators in the Fisher Investigation recommended that the Crown approve charges against Mr. Fisher and what they should consist of.

The non-disclosed emails or other forms of communication between police officers and the complainants in this case (the second group of material at issue in this appeal), consist of brief exchanges about the status of the proceedings against the appellants or attach images of text messages that I understand were disclosed during the trial. There is also material showing that NV, KC and SC received money from the VPD, as described earlier. 

Is There a Reasonable Possibility This Material Could Have Affected the Verdicts?

Having considered the disclosure made available from the Fisher Investigation, the complainants’ testimony about Mr. Fisher at the appellants’ trial, and the records attached to the fresh evidence application, I have concluded there is no reasonable possibility that the non-disclosed material could have affected the verdicts in the appellants’ case.

The appellants say full access to the sought-after material was necessary so that they could “have an understanding of Fisher’s modus operandi of exploitation … [and] explore the credibility and reliability of [NV, KC and SC] and, potentially, to support an abuse of process claim”. With respect to NV, in particular, the appellants stress that she acknowledged in her testimony that Mr. Fisher could have influenced her evidence. Yet, because of delays in disclosure and heavy redactions, the defence “could not attempt to refresh her memory [about how the influence may have occurred] by putting to her Fisher’s modus operandi …”.

There is no question that the circumstances that led to Mr. Fisher being charged with criminal offences represented, in the words of the appellants, a “gross violation of his duties as a police officer”. However, before each of NV, KC and SC testified, they provided statements to the police in the Fisher Investigation and denied that Mr. Fisher had engaged in sexual misconduct with them. They also denied that Mr. Fisher had given them money, told them what to say, or otherwise attempted to manipulate their evidence. These denials were then affirmed when they testified, other than NV agreeing to a possibility or even a likelihood of having been influenced in her evidence and not being able to remember that fact. Defence counsel did not explain what they meant when using the term “influence” in cross-examination; ask NV to explain her understanding of the term; put specific manipulation-inducing scenarios to NV; or canvass possible ways in which the influence may have manifested itself. NV simply accepted the possibility of influence (undefined), and it was left at that. At the same time, she went on to confirm in re-examination that what she told the court about the appellants was true and that nothing she said in her police statement was something Mr. Fisher told her to say.

From NV, KC and SC’s own evidence, the interactions between Mr. Fisher and the complainants in this case were not the same as his dealings with the two complainants and the witness in the Fisher Investigation. Some of the things he said to NV, KC and SC and his demeanour when interacting with them were described as “creepy”. However, there was no suggestion through the disclosure made available to the appellants before the trial, or, importantly, through the testimony of NV, KC or SC at the trial, that Mr. Fisher had perpetrated sexual assaults against them, coached them to lie or to cover up an offence, or otherwise manipulated their evidence. NV’s acknowledgment of possible influence over what she said about the appellants’ conduct was equivocal. And, as noted, she ultimately confirmed in her testimony that the narrative she provided about her involvement with the appellants was her narrative, not one crafted for her by Mr. Fisher.

In Moazami (2021), the appellant raised Mr. Fisher’s conduct as a ground of appeal in challenging his convictions on a 36-count indictment that contained prostitution-related, sex and human trafficking offences against eleven complainants. The offences were committed between February 2009 and October 2011. The trial commenced in September 2013 and ended in June 2014.

On appeal, Mr. Moazami alleged a miscarriage of justice and abuse of process arising out of Mr. Fisher’s involvement with complainants and witnesses who testified against him. Some of those individuals were also complainants in the Fisher Investigation. Mr. Fisher sexually offended against them. He was a lead investigator in the proceedings involving Mr. Moazami and he acted in a support role for some of the Moazami complainants during the police investigation and at the trial.

Mr. Moazami filed a fresh evidence application in support of his appeal. The Court set out that evidence in its reasons and it appears to have included the RTCCs prepared in the Fisher Investigation which were requested by the appellants in this case.

In his appeal, Mr. Moazami submitted that the circumstances surrounding Mr. Fisher’s misconduct justified a new trial. Among other things, it would allow Mr. Moazami to cross-examine the complainants or witnesses who testified against him about their relationships with Mr. Fisher and “undermin[e] their credibility”: at para. 178.
 
This Court disagreed. Mr. Fisher’s misconduct occurred after the complainants in Mr. Moazami’s case testified: at para. 183. As the Court explained (at paras. 186–187): … No one disputes that Mr. Fisher’s conduct was abhorrent, and breached the highest of trusts in terms of the women whom he offended against. However, based on the timing of his actions, it is clear that his conduct did not in any way affect the fair trial rights of Mr. Moazami. There is no evidence that supports the argument that such rights were affected. Save for E.S. [a witness in Mr. Moazami’s trial], all of the conduct alleged occurred after the testimony was given at trial. There is no evidence capable of supporting the allegation that the evidence of any of the complainants or witnesses was changed to the prejudice of Mr. Moazami. We have addressed E.S.’s testimony above. In our view, her evidence was not tainted by Mr. Fisher’s conduct. And even if it were, her evidence was of little significance in the overall trial. She was not a complainant, and the gist of her evidence was repeated by a number of other witnesses.
 
The Court also found that a new trial was not required in Mr. Moazami’s case to “restore the public’s faith in the administration of justice” (at paras. 189–190): … when balancing the prejudice to the integrity of the justice system, the answer again is a resounding no. Mr. Fisher’s conduct was appalling. Nothing we say in any way condones his actions as revealed in this case. Mr. Fisher has been convicted and punished for his conduct, and lost his career. To give the benefit of a new trial to Mr. Moazami, requiring the complainants to testify again, would, in our view, bring the administration of justice into disrepute and impugn the integrity of the justice system. H.W., E.S., M.N. and Z.C. were abused by Mr. Fisher and Mr. Moazami. It defies logic to conclude that the administration of justice requires that Mr. Moazami receive a new trial based on Mr. Fisher’s conduct. [Italics in the original.]

In my view, if there was no reasonable possibility that the circumstances surrounding Mr. Fisher’s misconduct could have affected the verdicts in Moazami (2021), a different outcome in this case would be illogical. I say this fully appreciating that each case is different and must be treated as such. Accordingly, the outcome of the appeal in Moazami (2021) cannot be determinative. However, I do consider it instructive. 

Unlike Moazami (2021), the complainants who testified in this case were not complainants in the Fisher Investigation. Moreover, they explicitly denied any sexual contact with Mr. Fisher or that he bribed or otherwise caused them to change their evidence. And, the appellants in this case did receive some disclosure surrounding Mr. Fisher’s misconduct at their trial; they knew he had been charged with sexual offences against vulnerable sex workers; they knew he communicated extensively with those individuals; they knew he was alleged to have coached one or more of the Fisher Investigation complainants to lie or cover up evidence of a crime; the appellants had an opportunity to cross-examine or recall NV, KC and SC to the extent that they considered it advantageous after receiving the Fisher Investigation statements; and, importantly, in convicting the appellants, the judge considered the concerns raised by the appellants in respect of the potential influence by Mr. Fisher: at para. 61. This was a live issue at the trial and he specifically turned his mind to it.

I accept that from the appellants’ perspectives, the credibility and reliability of the evidence of NV, KC and SC was a critical issue. However, I fail to see how cross-examining NV, KC and SC about Mr. Fisher’s modus operandi in relation to other complainants or witnesses in an unrelated prosecution, of which they would have no direct knowledge, could have realistically affected their evidence and the verdicts. NV, KC and SC received an opportunity to be fully disclosive of any misconduct involving Mr. Fisher, whether sexual or otherwise manipulative in nature, when they provided their statements in the Fisher Investigation. They denied that anything of that nature had occurred. Both KC and SC expressed surprise at the allegations made against Mr. Fisher. In other words, it was not something they themselves would have contemplated based on their own experiences with him.

NV, KC and SC could not be cross-examined on the statements provided by the Fisher Investigation complainants or witness; they could not be asked to comment on what those individuals said, their perceptions of Mr. Fisher, or the details of Mr. Fisher’s interactions with them. All the appellants could do is potentially take alleged facts from the Fisher Investigation and put them to NV, KC and SC, suggesting that “this too” had happened to them, notwithstanding their statements and testimony to the contrary. The material the appellants already had in hand allowed them to do that.

I agree with the Crown that in advancing this ground of appeal, the appellants have failed to establish any realistic probative link between the non-disclosed Fisher Investigation material and the complainants’ evidence in this case, such that additional disclosure could have provided a meaningful (as opposed to speculative) basis for challenging the credibility and reliability of their testimony.

In the face of NV, KC and SC’s denials that sexual misconduct, bribery or manipulation of their evidence occurred, the suggestion that Mr. Fisher’s modus operandi as made manifest in the Fisher Investigation must have also presented itself here, is conjectural.

Finally, I am also satisfied there is no reasonable possibility that the second group of disclosure the appellants take issue with (payments made to NV, KC and SC), could have affected the verdicts. I accept that the Crown should have disclosed these facts as part of its Stinchcombe disclosure. However, there were only small amounts of money involved. There is no indication that the money was paid to secure the co-operation of NV, KC and SC in the investigation or the trial. Instead, the money was paid as part of a government-sponsored program to assist sex workers in leaving the industry. Understandably, the appellants did not spend much time on this material when arguing their disclosure ground of appeal. It would have had little, if any, impact in assessing the credibility and reliability of NV, KC and SC. I see no prospect of the judge having had a reasonable doubt based on this information. He was well aware of the frailties associated with the complainants’ evidence; assessed and rationalized those frailties; and, in the context of his unique position as the trier of fact, he was prepared to accept their evidence. Information showing that they had received nominal amounts of money as part of a program designed to assist sex workers to leave the industry would not have made a difference.

I conclude that the appellants have not met the first branch of the Dixon and Taillefer test, as set out in Moazami (2021). 

Could the Non-Disclosure Have Affected the Fairness of the Trial?

I am also satisfied the appellants have not established a reasonable possibility that the non-disclosure affected the overall fairness of their trial.
In their factum, the appellants say the Fisher Investigation material could have assisted them “in making decisions about how to conduct the defences, including what investigations to undertake, whether to challenge [the] admissibility of evidence obtained pursuant to judicial process where [Mr. Fisher] was the affiant, [and] whether to advance claims of abuse of process or entrapment”. As noted, they have since abandoned the entrapment assertion.

The appellants have not persuaded me that the non-disclosure resulted in an unfair trial. The additional material they sought from the Fisher Investigation would not have realistically assisted in undermining the credibility and reliability of the testimony of NV, KC and SC. That was the primary focus of their disclosure applications. Nor, at law, could Mr. Fisher’s misconduct with witnesses involved in a different prosecution have provided a basis for challenging the admissibility of evidence in this one.

The appellants had knowledge of allegedly criminal conduct committed by Mr. Fisher; they were given opportunities to explore the complainants’ interactions with Mr. Fisher, the dynamics of those interactions and the extent to which the complainants were dependent on Mr. Fisher, or subject to his influence; and, after receiving the redacted statements from the Fisher Investigation, the appellants did not apply for details of the then-alleged sexual misconduct, or argue that greater access to that information would provide them with specific, additional avenues of investigative inquiry.

Instead, it appears they were content with the cross-examination they conducted (including not exploring with NV any particular ways in which Mr. Fisher might have influenced her testimony after she acknowledged this possibility); did not seek to recall any of the complainants; and closed their case with outstanding disclosure issues. One inference to draw from the decision to not recall NV, KC or SC for further cross-examination, is that the appellants were of the view that additional cross-examination, even with the further material, would not assist. Again, the appellants have not claimed on appeal that they were ineffectively assisted by their legal counsel at the trial.

It is also worth noting that access to the Fisher Investigation and cross-examination on the interactions between Mr. Fisher and his victims in that case carried the realistic potential of substantially broadening the scope of the appellants’ trial, causing undue delay, and inviting the judge to consider additional, downstream disclosure orders or to engage in fact finding in relation to matters not properly before him. This potential is readily apparent from the appellants’ factum. They note that a “covert investigation of a police officer regarding serious crimes would likely be complex, and involve information sources other than the Fisher Complainants. Thus, the Fisher Complainants’ statements alone could not be expected to provide sufficient information” (emphasis added).
 
In my view, bringing the allegations involving Mr. Fisher into the appellants’ trial, with no discernable nexus between the two prosecutions, would have unnecessarily complicated matters, unduly prolonged the trial, and exacerbated an already difficult testimonial process for obviously vulnerable complainants. Doing so was not in the interests of justice. As noted by the Supreme Court in R. v. Grant, 2015 SCC 9:
 
 … the accused’s rights are not the only interests at stake [in a criminal trial]. The integrity of the administration of justice requires that the proceedings stay focused on the indicted crime and not devolve into trials within a trial about matters that may not be sufficiently connected to the case. Such tangents risk causing delays, confusion and distractions that undermine the trial’s truth-seeking function …

Specific to the possibility of an abuse of process argument, the comments made by this Court in Moazami (2021), carry even greater force here: in a case in which there is no overlap between complainants, “[i]t defies logic to conclude that the administration of justice requires that [the appellants] receive a new trial based on Mr. Fisher’s conduct”: at para. 190.

I conclude that the appellants have not met the second branch of the Dixon and Taillefer test, as set out in Moazami (2021). Accordingly, I would not admit any parts of the fresh evidence that do not already form part of the record in the trial court, and would dismiss the disclosure ground of appeal.

As a result, I do not consider it necessary to address and resolve the various errors in principle said to have been committed by the judge in managing the appellants’ disclosure applications, or the alleged non-compliance with disclosure orders by the Crown. In my view, even if these arguments were shown to have some merit, in the context of the trial as it existed at the material time, the deprivations or impact said to have flowed from the stated errors and non-compliance would be inconsequential because the material the appellants say they were deprived of in making full answer and defence could not have affected the verdicts, or rendered their trial unfair. 

Did the Judge Err in Applying the Co-Conspirator Exception?

In convicting the appellants, the judge admitted the “out of court acts and statements of one accused … against the other as proof of the truth of its contents” on the basis of the co-conspirator exception to the rule against hearsay evidence: at para. 21. On this issue, he instructed himself relying on this Court’s decision in Wang.
 
In Wang, Justice Bennett set out the admissibility framework for the co-conspirator exception:
 
The co-conspirator’s exception to the hearsay rule permits out-of-court acts and declarations of others to be admitted into evidence against the accused for the truth of their contents …
 
On the other hand, triers of fact must not forget that this exception permits hearsay evidence before the court for the truth of its contents without the ability to cross-examine the maker of the statements …
 
In Carter [1982 CanLII 35 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 938, 137 D.L.R. (3d) 385], McIntyre J. established safeguards to test the exception to the hearsay rule (at 947–948). The “Carter test” is well-known, and requires consideration of the evidence in three stages. I restate them as follows: 

1) The trier of fact must consider all of the evidence to determine whether the existence of a conspiracy has been proved beyond a reasonable doubt. 
2) The trier of fact considers only the evidence directly admissible against the accused to determine if the accused is probably a member of the conspiracy. 
3) Once the first two stages are established, the trier of fact may consider all of the evidence, including the out-of-court acts and declarations of other members of the conspiracy and made in furtherance of the conspiracy to determine if the accused is an actual member of the conspiracy. This determination is beyond a reasonable doubt. See also R. v. Smith, 2007 NSCA 19 at paras. 194–197, affirmed 2009 SCC 5, [2009] 1 S.C.R. 146; R. v. Yumnu, 2010 ONCA 637 at paras. 338–340, affirmed 2012 SCC 73, 290 C.C.C. (3d) 323.
 
In order to use the evidence of another co-conspirator, that co-conspirator must be a probable member in the conspiracy. In addition, the co-conspirator’s acts and declarations must be in furtherance of the conspiracy. This does not mean that acts and declarations after the commission of the indictable offence are not admissible. The admission of the evidence relates to the agreement, not the substantive offence …

[Internal references omitted; underlining in the original.] See also R. v. Correia, 2016 BCCA 330 at paras. 24–29, and R. v. Tran, 2014 BCCA 343 at para. 78.

The co-conspirator exception is an evidentiary rule and determines admissibility. Errors of principle alleged to have been committed in applying the rule are subject to a correctness standard of review. Findings of fact made during the course of the analysis are entitled to deference: R. v. Potter, 2020 NSCA 9 at para. 518; R. v. Moir, 2020 BCCA 116 at para. 82.

The appellants allege errors in principle. They accept that the judge correctly recited the co-conspirator exception and the applicable “three-stage test”. However, they say he erred in applying the exception. More specifically, the judge:

(a) failed to explicitly identify one or more criminal purposes of the allegedly unlawful design or conspiracy;
(b) failed to identify the evidence he relied upon in finding that each appellant was a likely member of the conspiracy, or demonstrate that he conducted a meaningful analysis at stage two of the test; and
(c) failed to identify the specific acts and declarations of the appellants that were admissible against each other.

The appellants argue that given the importance of the co-conspirator exception in the context of this case, “it was necessary for the [judge] to provide sufficient reasons in support of his determination as to admissibility and the use he made of specific acts and declarations”.

Referring back to my earlier comments about appellate review, a judge’s reasons, including explanation of the rules of evidence they applied, are to be read “generously” and “with the presumption that the judge knows the law”: Gerrard at para. 2. The judge need not advert to every piece of evidence they considered or detail and explain each of their material findings: R.E.M. at paras. 15–20, 48–57. Nor are judges required to “demonstrate [in their reasons] their knowledge of basic criminal law principles”: G.F. at para. 74.

I am satisfied from paras. 21–45 of the reasons for conviction that the judge properly understood the admissibility framework he was obliged to apply in deciding whether the co-conspirator exception was available to the Crown; meaningfully considered each stage of the analysis; and, although his findings are briefly stated, the pathway to his application of the exception is discernable.

Specific to the errors alleged by the appellants, there is no merit to the suggestion that the judge failed to consider whether the “escort” operation involving the appellants was criminal in nature. (A criminal conspiracy requires proof of an intention to agree, the completion of an agreement and a common design to do something unlawful: United States of America v. Dynar, 2 S.C.R. 462, 1997 CanLII 359 (SCC) at para. 86 [Dynar]).

The Crown argued that the “criminal purpose” of the appellants’ joint venture with Mr. Alameddin was to “make money for themselves and in furtherance of this common enterprise … the [appellants] recruited girls and young women to work for them as “prostitutes”, exercised control and direction over them and exploited them with the intent of using the money … to finance their own lifestyles …”: at para. 30, emphasis added. The judge agreed with the Crown that the evidence supported this inference: at para. 31. In other words, he found as a fact (and thereby identified), that the purpose of the appellants’ “escort” operation was unlawful — they sought to recruit, exercise control over and exploit young women as sex workers for their own financial gain.

The judge also found, at para. 42, that the appellants were engaged in a joint venture “to dissuade [KC] from giving evidence in a judicial proceeding”, which violated s. 139(2) of the Criminal Code. (The appellants did not contest application of the co-conspirator exception to the evidence surrounding this count: para. 41.)

There is also no merit to the suggestion that the judge failed to identify the evidence he relied upon in finding that each appellant was a likely member of the two conspiracies. It is readily apparent from para. 31 of his reasons that in reaching his conclusion about the unlawful purpose(s) of the “escort” operation; in finding the existence of conspiracies; and in concluding that the appellants were probable members of those conspiracies, the judge considered the whole of the evidence, which consisted of evidence properly admissible against each of the appellants and the overall context for their acts and declarations. The admissibility framework for the co-conspirator exception allows for this type of consideration: Wang at para. 53; Tran at paras. 116–119.

At para. 31 of his reasons, the judge lists the conduct engaged in by each appellant, both individually and in support of each other, specific to each complainant and in furtherance of the “escort” operation. He took a holistic approach to the evidence, while at the same time recognizing that there were distinctions between each appellant’s degree of interaction with NV, KC and SC: at para. 32. The judge stated his conclusion on stage two of the co-conspirator exception succinctly and without an accompanying substantive or evidentiary analysis. However, in the particular circumstances of this case, the failure to do so does not constitute reversible error. The evidence that the judge considered in finding the existence of two conspiracies and the appellants’ probable involvement in those conspiracies is self-evident from his reasons.

Finally, the appellants say the judge erred by failing to delineate the specific acts and declarations that were admissible under the co-conspirator exception.

The judge did not provide clarity on this point, specific to the first conspiracy. He did so in respect of the second: at para. 45. It would have been preferable for the reasons to address this issue. However, at the hearing of the appeal, the appellants were asked to direct the Court’s attention to any place in the reasons that show the judge improperly used evidence specific to one appellant against the other. They were not able to do so in any meaningful way. Instead, the appellants seek to have this Court infer improper use of the co-conspirator exception based on the failure of the judge to expressly set out the evidence that properly fell within the scope of the rule.

I am not prepared to do so in light of the functional and contextual approach brought to bear on appellate review. It is apparent from his reasons that the judge was alive to the need to ensure that in determining the appellants’ guilt, he did not rely on evidence for an improper purpose. For instance, at paras. 47–48 of his reasons, he instructed himself that while statements made by the appellants were admissible as “admission[s] against interest”, text messages sent by the complainants could not be used to corroborate the complainants’ testimony because it would amount to oath-helping. The judge clearly did turn his mind to proper and improper uses of evidence and, applying G.F. and Gerrard, he is presumed to know the law. He is as equally entitled to the benefit of that presumption in respect of the co-conspirator exception, as he is to other aspects of the judgment. 

Did the Judge Err in His Approach to Party Liability?

The judge referred to s. 21 of the Code four times in his reasons. Section 21 sets out the bases upon which someone can be found liable as a “party” to a criminal offence.
 
First, at para. 13, the judge noted that in prosecuting the appellants, the Crown invoked both ss. 21(1) and (2) of the Code. He then set out the provisions: 

21 (1) Every one is a party to an offence who
(a) actually commits it;
(b) does or omits to do anything for the purpose of aiding any person to commit it; or
(c) abets any person in committing it.
(2) Where two or more persons form an intention in common to carry out an unlawful purpose and to assist each other therein and any one of them, in carrying out the common purpose, commits an offence, each of them who knew or ought to have known that the commission of the offence would be a probable consequence of carrying out the common purpose is a party to that offence.

At para. 14 of his reasons, the judge clarified the Crown’s position. Its “primary position” was that the appellants were “co-principals or co-perpetrators” of the charged offences. Section 21(2), often referred to as the “common intention” provision, was invoked by the Crown as an “alternative”.

This understanding of the Crown’s position was reiterated at paras. 21–22 of the reasons. The Crown’s “primary position” was that the appellants (along with Mr. Alameddin), were “co-principals in a joint venture under s. 21(1)(a) of the Code”. If the appellants were “not caught under s. 21(1)(a), then they may be [culpable] under s. 21(1)(b) or (c) as aiders or abettors, or 21(2)” (emphasis added).

The fourth and last reference to s. 21 appears at para. 114 of the reasons. In that paragraph, the judge described Mr. Mohsenipour as a “co-conspirator in the recruitment of girls for the sex trade … and the operation of a pimping business”, and found him guilty of count 1 of the indictment “based on s. 21(2) of the Criminal Code”. Count 1 charged the appellants with procuring or attempting to procure NV to become a prostitute.

The appellants say that in finding them guilty of counts 1–18, the judge mixed up or conflated ss. 21(1) and (2); failed to appreciate the distinctive elements of these provisions, or the findings of fact that were necessary to properly invoke them; and, he provided no meaningful analysis of party liability. The appellants contend the findings of guilt were expressed in conclusory terms and it is impossible to discern the pathway to culpability from the judge’s reasons. These are errors in principle and subject to a correctness standard: Housen v. Nikolaisen, 2002 SCC 33 at para. 8.

The Crown says there is no merit to this ground of appeal. It argues the judge did not confuse ss. 21(1) and (2) and the convictions entered for counts 1–18 are easily explained with reference to these provisions.
 
The distinctions between ss. 21(1) and (2) are helpfully set out in R. v. Simon, 2010 ONCA 754, leave to appeal ref’d, 33983 (5 May 2011):
 
Persons who participate in the offence actually committed, whether as a principal, an aider or an abettor, have their liability determined under s.21(1).
 
Section 21(2) extends liability for crime in two respects. The first has to do with the persons whose participation in an unlawful enterprise may attract liability. And the second relates to the offence for which participants in an unlawful criminal enterprise may be held liable …
 
The persons to whom s. 21(2) extends liability are those whose participation in the offence actually committed would not be captured by s. 21(1). These persons have participated in a prior unlawful enterprise with others and either knew or, in most cases at least, should have known that one (or more) of the other participants in the original enterprise would likely commit the offence charged in pursuing their original purpose.
 
The offence to which s. 21(2) extends liability is not the original “unlawful purpose” to which the subsection refers. The “offence” of s. 21(2) is a different crime, one that a participant in the original “unlawful purpose” commits in carrying out that original purpose. And so it is that we sometimes say that s. 21(2) extends liability to those engaged in one unlawful purpose to incidental or collateral crimes: crimes committed by any participant (in the original purpose) in carrying out the original purpose that the other knew or should have known would likely be committed in pursuing the original purpose … [Italics in original; internal references omitted.]

I am satisfied that the bases for liability against the appellants are discernable from the judge’s reasons. Moreover, I am satisfied that the implied findings of fact set out at para. 31 provided ample bases from which he could find, consistent with the Crown’s primary theory, that the appellants were culpable as principals, co-principals or aiders or abettors in the counts in which they were named: Code, ss. 21(1)(a)–(c).

I appreciate that para. 31 was crafted in the specific context of a discussion about the co-conspirator exception to the rule against hearsay evidence; however, this paragraph clearly sets out the judge’s view of the evidence that was adduced by the Crown, including the nature of the appellants’ “escort” operation; events that occurred during that joint venture; and the appellants’ individual and collective degrees of responsibility. It is based on this evidence that the judge found beyond a reasonable doubt that the appellants were engaged in a conspiracy — they had agreed on a common design to do something unlawful: Dynar at para. 86.

Paragraph 31 makes it clear that the judge found that the appellants were working together as co-principals or, at a minimum, aiding or abetting each other in a joint venture. Paragraphs 32, 33, 35, 44, 56, 114, 123, 124, 125, 130, 135, 204, 226, 232, 268, 270 and 276 are to the same effect. 

With this context, I consider the judge’s reference to s. 21(2) in para. 114 of his reasons (the only time he cited s. 21(2) as a basis for liability), to be a misspeak. When his reasons surrounding count 1 are read in their entirety, I am satisfied the judge convicted the appellants under count 1 relying on s. 21(1), with Mr. Albashir being the principal offender and Mr. Mohsenipour a co-principal, or, at the very least, an aider or abettor.

Count 1 charged both appellants with procuring or attempting to procure NV to become a prostitute between May 15, 2013 and July 1, 2013. The judge found, as a fact, that when NV first met the appellants, they asked her if she wanted to work as a prostitute: at para. 108. Mr. Albashir was “doing the talking”, but Mr. Mohsenipour was present: at para. 108. NV was later contacted on Facebook by Mr. Albashir, who asked if she remained interested in working for the appellants. After she said she was, the “two men picked her up, driving in Mr. Albashir’s black Infinity, and took her to a store where they bought her a cell phone”: at para. 109, emphasis added. “They then dropped her off at her home and Mr. Albashir told her he would be in touch in a couple of weeks”: at para. 109, emphasis added.

The judge identified procuring as a “process” (at para. 110), and found that in the circumstances of this case, the process included (but was not limited to): NV being asked if she would like to be an “escort” while Mr. Mohsenipour was in attendance; being taken by both appellants to purchase a cell phone; and, having photos taken for the appellants’ online site: at para. 110. Mr. Mohsenipour was found to have been “active during [that] photoshoot, giving instructions on how to pose”: at para. 113.

On the judge’s findings, NV was plainly solicited to work for the appellants in their joint venture. He found that the joint venture included the “recruitment of girls for the sex trade”: at para. 114. Mr. Mohsenipour was with Mr. Albashir when the latter directly engaged NV in the first discussion about working for them; he actively participated in the “process” that was found to constitute her procurement, including giving directions during the photo shoot; and, importantly, he was a “co-conspirator” in the “pimping business” for which NV was recruited and participated: at para. 114. At law, this rendered Mr. Mohsenipour a co-principal in the procurement within the meaning of s. 21(1)(a), or, at a minimum, an aider or abettor under ss. 21(b) and (c). There was no need in these circumstances to invoke s. 21(2) and the judge’s reference to it was harmless.

I note that in R. v. B. (A.D.), 1999 BCCA 105, this Court upheld a conviction for procurement based on party liability that was grounded in evidence of the appellant “giving assistance” in a “recruitment process”: at para. 25. The same can be said here. 

In support of this ground of appeal (as well as others), the appellants take issue with the way in which the Crown articulated legal principles at the trial and Crown counsel’s submissions on how those principles should be applied by the judge. The appellants say that on more than one occasion, Crown counsel with conduct of the prosecution misstated the law or encouraged the judge to adopt an erroneous analytical approach. There is no doubt that in some circumstances, the positions taken by parties at a trial and the manner in which they frame and articulate the substantive and procedural issues relevant to the case, can inform this Court’s assessment and determination of error. For example, it may assist in understanding the context for an error that is found to have been committed by the judge, or, it may assist in assessing the prejudice that was perceived to have flowed from a position taken by one of the parties or an interlocutory ruling. However, an appeal is from the verdict and errors alleged to have been committed by the judge, not the positions taken or arguments made by counsel. In assessing whether the judge erred in his application of party liability in this case, it is the reasons for conviction that matter. 

Did the Judge Err in His Credibility Assessments?

The credibility of the complainants was a significant issue at the trial. The judge found each of NV, KC and SC to be credible witnesses. His specific conclusions in that regard are set out at paras. 61–62, 182–183, 191–195, and 237–238 of his reasons.
 
With respect to all three women, the judge also noted (at para. 6): [That their] decision to work with the authorities, provide statements, and appear as witnesses in this proceeding was a difficult choice for each. A support worker was involved. N.V. reached out to Mr. Albashir for advice on what to do about her desire not be involved in the prosecution, even though much time had passed since they had last had contact. K.C. has undergone turmoil in the actions she has taken in working with the authorities. S.C. displayed considerable distress when relating events as well as the impact her involvement in prostitution has had on her life. All three gave evidence of having had a belief or hope in romance with one of the three named accused. Though there is evidence of sexual conduct and gift giving; it appears the latter was largely from the women, and there is little evidence of romance being reciprocated by the men. In terms of the evidence of the complainants leaving and returning to the men, their statements of being in a partnership and their statements of wanting to be an escort, I have considered these in light of their circumstances, vulnerabilities, dependencies, economics and normalization. I have noted the testimony of the complainants and not being afraid of the men but also the violence they encountered, observed and or related to them. My sense of the testimony of being unafraid was more bravado, defiance and normalization. In this case, sadly, drugs and/or alcohol dependencies arose during the relevant period with each of the complainants. It seems they continue to struggle with this …

The appellants acknowledge that the judge took a cautious approach to the evidence of the complainants: at para. 238. They also accept that he considered the complainants’ testimonial frailties before deciding to rely on what they had to say. However, the appellants say that notwithstanding these factors, the judge ultimately failed to conduct a proper analysis of how his concerns with their evidence were overcome. He gave too much weight to their demeanour, allowing it to overwhelm the credibility assessment. He also failed to provide sufficient reasons for why he accepted the complainants’ evidence in light of his concerns.

In my view, there is no merit to this ground of appeal.

In addition to identifying specific frailties associated with each complainant’s evidence, it is apparent from para. 6 of the judge’s reasons that in assessing credibility, he considered the complainants’ social context or lived realities, including: probable substance use disorders, economic desperation, exposure to violence as youth, and personal trauma arising from their involvement in sex work, an activity that is judicially-recognized to be inherently risk-laden. This he was entitled to do. It is wholly appropriate for a judge to consider relevant social context when assessing credibility: R. v. Theriault, 2021 ONCA 517 at para. 146, leave to appeal ref’d, 39768 (16 December 2021). In Bedford, the Supreme Court noted that “while some [sex workers] may fit the description of persons who freely choose (or at one time chose) to engage in the risky economic activity of [sex work], many [of them] have no meaningful choice but to do so”: at para. 86.

Credibility findings “deserve particular deference”: G.F. at para. 81. They will not be set aside on appeal in the absence of palpable and overriding error. The trial judge is “the fact finder and has the benefit of the intangible impact of conducting the trial”: G.F. at para. 81. Assessing credibility “is not a science”: R. v. Gagnon, 2006 SCC 17 at para. 20. Instead, it involves a “complex intermingling of impressions that emerge after watching and listening to witnesses and attempting to reconcile the various versions of events”: Gagnon at para. 20. For this reason, “appellate courts have been repeatedly cautioned against substituting their own assessment of credibility for that of the trial judge when there is a reasonable basis for the trial judge’s conclusions on credibility: R. v. M.D., 2021 BCCA 339 at para. 55, citing Gagnon at paras. 22–23; R.E.M. at para. 48.

The appellants have not established palpable and overriding error. They have not pointed to particular findings by the judge that reflect a misapprehension of the complainants’ evidence; an error in principle or impermissible reasoning that resulted in a flawed and irreparably tainted assessment of credibility or reliability; or evidence that the judge either disregarded or failed to consider in his analysis and, if accepted, would render reliance on the complainants’ testimony unreasonable and without support.

Instead, they simply assert that the judge overemphasized demeanour (a relevant factor for consideration in assessing credibility: R. v. Ceal, 2012 BCCA 19 at para. 24), and did not say enough about the reasons why he believed NV, KC and SC. In a case such as this, where the reasons demonstrate that the judge was alive to the fact that credibility was at issue, and he identified specific frailties and explained why they did not raise a reasonable doubt, generalized complaints about an overemphasis on demeanour and the judge not having said enough are insufficient to meet the onus on appellate review. 

Is the Procurement Verdict Unreasonable?

The appellants argue that the verdict on count 1 of the indictment is unreasonable within the meaning of s. 686(1)(a)(i) of the Code. As noted, count 1 charged the appellants with procuring NV to become a prostitute between May 15, 2013 and July 1, 2013.

The appellants accept that the judge correctly instructed himself on the meaning of “procure” for the purpose of this offence. At para. 101 of his reasons, the judge cited R. v. Deutsch, 1986 CanLII 21 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 2, in which Justice Le Dain agreed at para. 35 that to “procure” means to cause, induce or to have a persuasive effect on someone.

However, the appellants say there was no evidence of causing, inducing or persuading NV to become a prostitute. As such, from their perspectives, the procurement verdict is not supported by the record and cannot stand.
 
I appreciate that the appellants interpret the evidence surrounding the start of NV’s involvement in their “escort” operation differently than the judge. They would not have assigned the weight to NV’s testimony that he did. Nor would they have drawn the same inferences. However, that is not a proper basis for appellate intervention under s. 686(1)(a)(i). Instead, in order for a judge alone verdict to be set aside on the ground that it is unsupported by the evidence, the verdict must be one that:

… a “properly instructed jury acting judicially, could [not] reasonably have rendered” (R. v. Biniaris, 2000 SCC 15 (CanLII), [2000] 1 S.C.R. 381, at para. 36, quoting R. v. Yebes, 1987 CanLII 17 (SCC), [1987] 2 S.C.R. 168, at p. 185) … R. v. C.P., 2021 SCC 19.

I would not accede to this ground of appeal. In finding the appellants guilty of procuring NV, the judge took several pieces of evidence into account, none of which is challenged by the appellants on appeal. Evidence at the trial included: 

• NV was 15 years old, missing school, getting into trouble at home (she did not like her mother’s “rules”), using heroin, and looking for a way out of her home situation at the time she was first asked to work for the appellants: at paras. 105–106; 
• After that meeting, Mr. Albashir followed up by communicating with her through Facebook, again soliciting her interest in working for the appellants: at para. 109; 
• Once NV confirmed her interest, the appellants picked her up, took her to a store and purchased a cell phone for her. She was without a cell phone at the time, as hers had broken. She was told that the purpose of the new phone was for the appellants to keep in touch with her: at para. 109; 
• She understood that in working for the appellants, she was expected to perform sexual services; 
• Arrangements were made to take photographs of NV for the appellants’ online site. She was told that the place they took the photos was where she would be living and working: at para. 110; 
• When the appellants picked up NV for the purpose of the photo shoot, she had her personal belongings with her because she was planning on leaving home and living with the appellants; 
• She was provided with a place to live in downtown Vancouver: at para. 110; 
• She started working for the appellants the same day as the photo shoot; and, 
• NV testified that “at the beginning”, she thought she was going to be in a relationship with Mr. Albashir. However, she later “learned … that was not to be the case”: at para. 66.

In light of this foundation, the inferences drawn by the judge were reasonably open to him, not only in relation to the appellants’ intent or purpose in soliciting NV’s interest and in facilitating her involvement in their “escort” operation, but the effect of their conduct on NV. This included the inference that when NV first met the appellants, she was “looking for a way out of her mom’s home” (at para. 106); the appellants’ conduct would have implied to NV that she would be able to earn money if she worked for them (at para. 110); and NV testified she was initially under the impression that she and Mr. Albashir were going to be in a romantic relationship (at para. 110). 

The judge was entitled, in his words, to consider the evidence adduced in support of procuring “in context” (at para. 110), including NV’s youth, her personal circumstances and vulnerability, and the way things may have appeared to her at the material time. He took the cumulative effect of the evidence into account: para. 110. It was not erroneous to do so. In deciding whether the Crown has proved an offence, evidence is considered as a whole, not piecemeal.

To sustain a conviction for procuring, the Crown does not have to prove that the acts of persistence or persuasion said to constitute the actus reus of the offence overcame the victim’s resistance or overpowered her will: R. v. B. (K.), 2004 CanLII 36124 (ON CA), 2004 CarswellOnt 1105 (ONCA), 184 C.C.C. (3d) 290 at paras. 52–53. It is enough if they had a persuasive effect.

I am not persuaded, on this record, that there was no evidence to support the judge’s findings, thereby rendering the verdict on count 1 unreasonable. That is the onus borne by the appellants: Ceal at para. 25. 

Did the Judge Err in His Interpretation of Section 279.01(1)?

Counts 10 and 17 of the indictment charged the appellants with human trafficking specific to KC and SC. Section 279.01(1) of the Code stipulates that: 

279.01 (1) Every person who recruits, transports, transfers, receives, holds, conceals or harbours a person, or exercises control, direction or influence over the movements of a person, for the purpose of exploiting them or facilitating their exploitation is guilty of an indictable offence … [Emphasis added.]
 
What constitutes “exploitation” for the purpose of s. 279.01(1) is set out in s. 279.04(1): 

279.04 (1) For the purposes of sections 279.01 to 279.03, a person exploits another person if they cause them to provide, or offer to provide, labour or a service by engaging in conduct that, in all the circumstances, could reasonably be expected to cause the other person to believe that their safety or the safety of a person known to them would be threatened if they failed to provide, or offer to provide, the labour or service.
(2) In determining whether an accused exploits another person under subsection (1), the Court may consider, among other factors, whether the accused 
(a) used or threatened to use force or another form of coercion; 
(b) used deception; or 
(c) abused a position of trust, power or authority. [Emphasis added.]
 
The judge reviewed these sections and then described the “elements of the offence” established under s. 279.01(1) this way (at para. 220): 1) Conduct: Recruit, transport, transfer, receive, hold, conceal or harbour a person, or exercise control, direction or influence over a person’s movements; 2) Purpose: For the purpose of exploiting that person or facilitating that person’s exploitation.

Citing various cases, including R. v. A. (A.), 2015 ONCA 558, the judge noted that to be found guilty of human trafficking, an accused “need not actually exploit the complainant; it is the accused’s purpose that matters”: at para. 224, emphasis added.

A. (A.) offers helpful guidance on the mens rea for the offence. Writing for the Court, Justice Watt explained the fault requirement for human trafficking at para. 82. It consists of two components:

(a) an intent to do anything that satisfies the conduct requirement; and
(b) the objective of the conduct, the reason for which it is done, or the intended result must be to exploit someone or to facilitate that person’s exploitation.

The appellants take no issue with Justice Watt’s articulation of the fault requirement. Section 279.01(1) is a specific intent offence. 

Judge’s Findings

The judge found the appellants guilty of counts 10 and 17.
 
Specific to KC, the judge found (at para. 226): … that both Mr. Albashir and Mr. Mohsenipour recruited K.C., harboured her by providing her a place to live, transported her to different locations, exercised direction and influence over her movements by telling her where to go, when she could leave, and setting rules about her working conditions such as how many days she had to work and her hours … This finding established the “conduct element” (or actus reus) of s. 279.01(1) for each of the appellants: at para. 226.

In relation to mens rea, the judge found that Mr. Albashir’s conduct “was designed to facilitate [KC]’s exploitation”: at para. 227, emphasis added. Among other things, he used violence for the purpose of controlling her: at para. 228. KC testified that Mr. Albashir demanded that she respect him or “she would get taxed or beat up”: at para. 228. Other forms of abusive conduct against KC involved: “using abusive language designed to undermine her self-esteem, slapping and punching her, and telling her daughter that he loved her more than her mother …”: at para. 229.

The judge found that Mr. Albashir harboured and exercised direction and influence over KC’s movements “so that he could have easy access to her for the purpose of exploiting her”: at para. 230, emphasis added. The judge then described this conduct as “at the very least facilitating exploitation”: at para. 230.
 
In terms of Mr. Mohsenipour, that judge found that in relation to KC, Mr. Mohsenipour was “most accurately viewed as acting for the purpose of facilitating Mr. Albashir’s exploitation of [KC]”: at para. 232, emphasis added. The appellants (at para. 232): … knew how the other operated, including by the use of violence. They were intimately involved with each other’s businesses. It can be inferred from this that they knew that isolating the complainants and having easy access to them would make it easier to exploit them, and acted for the purpose of doing so. [Emphasis added.]

After reaching these conclusions, the judge moved to s. 279.02(1) of the Code (charged in counts 11 and 18), and found that the evidence was “abundantly clear” that the appellants received a financial benefit from trafficking KC. They were “invested in [KC]. They purchased supplies, rented her condos, drove her to Edmonton and transported her to outcalls”: at para. 235. He found the appellants guilty under s. 279.02(1).

Turning to SC, the judge found as a fact that the appellants “recruited, transported and harboured [SC], and exercised direction and influence over her movements”: at para. 281. This met the actus reus requirement of s. 279.01(1) for each of them.
 
He then found that the circumstances surrounding the appellants’ interaction with SC could (at para. 283): … be seen as one of facilitating. The actions of placing S.C. in a location the men chose made it easier for Mr. Mohsenipour to exploit her. Having her work for them, knowing where she is and having easy access to her better enabled Mr. Mohsenipour to engage in violent and threatening conduct, including the gun-to-head incident. In addition, being informed that the accused had beat up Nebs [another sex worker] for stealing from them and, more importantly, trying to get K.C. to go independent could reasonably have led both to feel that they could face physical harm if they themselves could tried to go independent, even though Nebs was beaten for trying to get someone else to go independent and not just for doing so herself. In my view the use of such violence, particularly in one of the apartments in which the complainants were harboured, can establish that the purpose of harbouring them there was in part to make it easier to exploit them. Certainly, if they lived in a location not controlled and accessible to the accused, it would be much more difficult to lure individuals over to beat them up in front of the complainants. Seen in the light of all of the evidence, it is apparent that facilitating exploitation was in fact the goal of the accused. [Emphasis added.]

Paragraph 283 reflects a finding that Mr. Mohsenipour personally exploited SC by placing a gun to her head. Mr. Albashir was found to have facilitated the exploitation by Mr. Mohsenipour: at para. 284. For both men, the judge found that “one of the purposes of influencing the movements of [SC] and harbouring her in locations they controlled and had access to was to make it easier to exploit her should they need to”: at para. 285, emphasis added. They were each found guilty of having trafficked SC under s. 279.01(1).

Turning to s. 279.02(1), the judge found the appellants guilty of receiving a financial or other material benefit in relation to SC, knowing that the benefit was obtained by or derived from the human trafficking offence. He did not set out the evidence he considered in relation to this offence; however, these findings of guilt immediately followed his analysis of the evidence involving SC specific to s. 279.01(1). On a functional reading of his reasons, he clearly saw the convictions under s. 279.02(1) to logically flow from his earlier findings of fact. 

Parties’ Positions on Section 279.01(1)

The appellants argue that the judge convicted them of counts 10, 11, 17 and 18 applying a “legally incorrect route to liability”. This contention raises a question of law. A trial judge’s interpretation of a statutory provision delineating the essential elements of an offence is reviewed for correctness: R. v. Johnson, 1973 CanLII 198 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 160, 40 D.L.R. (3d) 215 at 170; Housen at para. 8. So is a judge’s assessment of evidence on the basis of an incorrect legal principle: R. v. H. (J.M.), 2011 SCC 45 at paras. 29–30. 

The appellants say the judge did not find them guilty of the s. 279.01(1) offence on the basis that they knowingly committed one or more forms of the proscribed conduct for the purpose of exploiting KC and SC, or for the purpose of facilitating the exploitation of KC and SC by someone else.

Instead, the appellants say the judge entered convictions for human trafficking on the basis that the appellants facilitated their own exploitation of the complainants, or, facilitated each other’s facilitation of their own exploitation. (The appellants describe the latter routes to liability as a “tertiary mode”.) They submit that the judge’s approach to s. 279.01(1) is confusing, inconsistent with case authority, unsupported by the modern principle of statutory interpretation, and legally incorrect.

The Crown responds by contending that the judge made no such error. His discussion of the fault requirement is admittedly confusing at times. However, when his reasons are read as a whole, and within the context of the record, it is apparent that the judge convicted the appellants under ss. 279.01(1) based on the fact that Mr. Albashir actually exploited KC; Mr. Mohsenipour actually exploited SC; and that in jointly participating in the recruitment, transport, harbouring and control of these women, the appellants intended to facilitate the exploitation of KC and SC by each other.

The Crown says that in light of these findings, only two routes to liability were applied by the judge, both of which are expressly contemplated by the plain wording of s. 279.01(1). 

Analysis

The parties spent considerable time in their factums addressing the proper interpretation of s. 279.01(1); its legislative background; the meaning of “facilitation”; whether this provision is ambiguous; whether it should be interpreted with reference to Charter values; or, ultimately, whether it should be assessed for constitutional compliance.

I do not consider it necessary to conduct an in-depth analysis of the allowable reach of s. 279.01(1). This is because, in my view, the judge did not find the appellants guilty of ss. 279.01(1) and (2) on the bases alleged by the appellants. As such, the interpretation that they complain of, and which they say raises serious concerns about the wording of s. 279.01(1) and its application, does not arise. Those are questions best left for another day, in the context of a case in which the purported interpretive conundrum is realistically a live issue. (I note, parenthetically, that if an individual takes steps or puts a plan in action to facilitate their own exploitation of a particular individual, they are, functionally, conducting themselves for the “purpose of exploiting” that person.) 

I agree with the Crown that on a fair reading of the reasons in this case, the judge found that Mr. Albashir personally exploited KC and that Mr. Mohsenipour personally exploited SC. In addition, he found that they both facilitated exploitation of these complainants by each other. Under either scenario, the appellants meet the fault requirement for s. 279.01(1). And, for the purpose of this appeal, the judge’s findings accord with the interpretation of the provision that is advanced by the appellants in their written material, namely, that to sustain a conviction under s. 279.01(1) for having “facilitated” exploitation, the Crown must prove that an “accused knowingly committed the prohibited conduct (recruited, transported, etc.) for the specific purpose of facilitating that person’s exploitation by another” (italics in original).

The judge found that Mr. Albashir controlled KC through violence and other forms of abusive conduct: at paras. 228–230. He found that Mr. Mohsenipour controlled SC by engaging in “violent and threatening conduct” towards her, including putting a gun to her head: at para. 283. Actual or threatened force is a factor that supports a finding of exploitation within the meaning of s. 279.01(1). See s. 279.04(2)(a) of the Code.

The inferential effect of finding that KC and SC were controlled by the appellants through the use of actual or threatened violence, and thereby exploited, is that the appellants conducted themselves this way “for the purpose of exploitation”. Justice Watt made this point in A. (A.): “In cases where exploitation, as defined in s. 279.04, arises from the facts, inferring that the accused's purpose was to exploit the victim will usually be a relatively straightforward task”: at para. 87, emphasis added. See also R. v. Gallone, 2019 ONCA 663 at para. 54.

The judge also found that the appellants intended to facilitate exploitation by each other. Consistent with the Supreme Court’s decision in R. v. Legare, 2009 SCC 56, in which the Court interpreted the Code’s child luring provision, I consider the word “facilitate” in the context of s. 279.01(1) to mean helping to bring about and making easier or more probable.

The judge found that Mr. Mohsenipour facilitated Mr. Albashir’s exploitation of KC. Mr. Mohsenipour knew how Mr. Albashir “operated, including by the use of violence”: at para. 232. He was “intimately involved” with Mr. Albashir’s “business”: at para. 232. He knew that “isolating the complainants and having easy access to them would make it easier to exploit them [including by Mr. Albashir], and acted for the purpose of doing so”: at para. 232, emphasis added.

The judge made these same findings in respect of Mr. Albashir. He knew how Mr. Mohsenipour “operated, including by the use of violence”: at paras. 232, 284. Mr. Albashir was “intimately involved” with Mr. Mohsenipour’s “business”: at para. 232, 284. He knew that “isolating the complainants and having easy access to them would make it easier to exploit them [including by Mr. Mohsenipour], and acted for the purpose of doing so”: at paras. 232, 284, emphasis added. 

The judge’s reasons explaining his application of s. 279.01(1) are not a model of clarity. I agree with the appellants that some aspects of the discussion are confusing. For example, at para. 230, the judge states that Mr. Albashir harboured KC and exercised direction and influence over her movements so that he could have “easy access to her for the purpose of exploiting her”. On the face of it, this statement attributes to Mr. Albashir an intent to personally exploit. However, the judge immediately follows the sentence with: “This is at the very least facilitating exploitation”: at para. 230, emphasis added. If Mr. Albashir intended to personally exploit KC and had that purpose in mind, then there was no need for the judge to consider the issue of facilitation in respect of him. And, who is the “exploiter” in the latter scenario? Mr. Albashir, or someone else? Standing alone, the second of these two statements is confusing.

However, the judge’s discussion of s. 279.01(1) cannot be read in isolation. Instead, it is to be considered in the context of the reasons as a whole. Those reasons include findings that the appellants were co-conspirators in a jointly-run “escort” operation in which both KC and SC were involved. Working together, the appellants arranged for rental premises in which the complainants would work; managed their website ads; paid for ads; provided supplies for the complainants’ sex work; provided transportation for the purpose of “out calls”; responded to calls from prospective clients and arranged the meetings; provided security to the complainants when needed; collected the money from them; and paid the complainants after “deducting their take”: at para. 56.

In the context of a joint venture, in which the appellants were not only personally interacting with KC and SC, but assisting and supporting each other in furtherance of a common enterprise, a determination that they conducted themselves for both the purpose of exploiting the complainants themselves, and to facilitate exploitation by each other, was reasonably open to the judge. The actus reus of the s. 279.01(1) offence, and the exploitation that informed the assessment and determination of specific intent, formed an integral part of the joint venture and was committed in furtherance of the appellants’ common design.

The appellants complain that in his discussion of the trafficking offences, the judge did not “link” any of the proscribed acts found to have been committed by them to the conclusions reached about their intent. I do not read the discussion that way.

In my view, it is clear from the judge’s delineation of the “elements of the offence” at para. 220 that he understood the necessity of the actus reus and the mens rea operating in tandem. At para. 226, he set out his proscribed conduct findings in relation to KC. In the very next paragraph, he moved to Mr. Albashir’s intent in respect of that conduct, finding that it was “designed to facilitate [KC]’s exploitation”. At para. 232, and within the context of this same discussion, the judge discussed Mr. Mohsenipour’s intent. This same approach was taken in respect of the evidence involving SC. At para. 281, the judge found that the appellants “recruited, transported and harboured [SC], and exercised direction and influence over her movements”. This is the proscribed conduct. He then immediately turned to the question of whether “any of this was done” (emphasis added), for the purpose of exploiting SC or facilitating her exploitation, and assessed the intent of both appellants: at paras. 282–285. It is apparent from the manner in which the judge structured these parts of his reasons that in convicting the appellants under s. 279.01(1), he identified the acts committed by the appellants that met the actus reus requirement, and then considered their intent with respect to those same acts. I see no error here. 

Did the Trial Judge Err in His Application of Section 279.01(2)?

Under s. 279.02(1), everyone who “receives a financial or other material benefit, knowing that it is obtained by or derived directly or indirectly from the commission of an offence under s. 279.01(1)”, is also guilty of an offence.

As noted, the appellants were charged with this offence in counts 11 and 18 of the indictment. KC and SC were the named complainants. The judge’s findings specific to s. 279.02(1) have been set out earlier.

Parties’ Positions on Section 279.01(2)

The appellants say that even if the human trafficking convictions are sound (which I have found they are), the judge’s application of s. 279.01(2) is “tainted by serious legal error” and inadequately explained. They contend that he appears to have found the appellants guilty of this offence on the understanding that once the Crown established an offence under s. 279.01(1), “proof of the offence of [a] material benefit … [flows] as a matter of course”. Instead, the judge should have asked himself, and separately analyzed, whether any of the financial or other material benefits received by the appellants “derived from actual exploitation”. If the benefits “derived simply from prostitution”, the offence has not been made out.

The Crown disagrees with the appellants’ interpretation. It contends that if s. 279.01(1) does not require proof of actual exploitation (which the appellants accept), it would be illogical to require for the purpose of s. 279.01(2) that the Crown link each and every received benefit to an act that had actual exploitive effect. To adopt the appellants’ approach to s. 279.01(2) would mean that in the absence of actual exploitation crystallizing in a particular factual matrix, people who intentionally commit one or more of the proscribed acts in s. 279.01(1) with the purpose (or specific intent) of exploiting someone, or of facilitating the exploitation of that person, could collect financial or other material benefits for their participation with impunity. From the Crown’s perspective, Parliament could not have intended this result. 

Analysis

As with the interpretive arguments raised in respect of s. 279.01(1), I do not consider it necessary in the particular circumstances of this case to address the question of whether a conviction may only be entered under s. 279.01(2) on proof that the benefits received by an accused were directly linked to, and therefore derived from, exploitive acts.

This is because, contrary to what is suggested by the appellants, the judge found as a fact that each of the appellants personally exploited at least one of KC and SC, and that they did this as part of their joint venture.

Moreover, he found that they each facilitated exploitive acts by each other. They recruited, transported, transferred, received, held, concealed or harboured KC and SC, or exercised control, direction or influence over their movement “[knowing] how the other operated, including by the use of violence”: at para. 232, emphasis added. In other words, in running their “escort” operation, each of the appellants knew that in furtherance of the common enterprise, the other would engage in conduct that could reasonably be expected to cause KC or SC to believe that their safety would be threatened if they failed to provide, or offer to provide, sex work: s. 279.04(1). They understood that the joint venture from which they were receiving benefits involved exploitive conduct. As such, even assuming without deciding that the appellants’ interpretation of s. 279.01(2) is correct, the judge’s findings amount to a conclusion that the appellants knowingly derived financial or other material benefits from actual exploitation.

I agree it would have been helpful if the judge had more clearly explained his pathway to conviction under s. 279.01(2). He did speak in conclusory terms on this issue (as well as some others), and in the context of a 38-day trial with a voluminous record, multiple counts and complex evidentiary and substantive issues, something more is generally required than to simply state that the Crown has established an offence beyond a reasonable doubt.

However, this was a 383-paragraph judgment that, in addition to the discussion surrounding s. 279.01(1), is replete with findings of exploitive conduct specific to KC and SC.

The judge accepted KC’s evidence: at para. 195. KC described sustaining a black eye when struck by Mr. Albashir (confirmed by a photograph): at para. 168. She described Mr. Albashir grabbing her arm and cutting it with his fingernails: at para. 168. On another occasion, he grabbed her by the hair, placed his hands around her neck and pushed her up against a wall: at para. 168. One time, when she refused to attend an “outcall”, Mr. Albashir grabbed KC by the throat, threw her to the ground and placed his knee on her face: at para. 169.

KC testified that she witnessed both appellants kicking and hitting another sex worker: at para. 171. The judge found that physical, emotional or financial “punishments” were imposed or threatened on KC for not adhering to the rules: at para. 203. Mr. Albashir had a “demanding personality” and KC would “fall in line in order not to be subjected to [his] anger”: at para 203. Assaults inflicted by Mr. Albashir were “related to [KC’s] work”: at para. 203. Watching the appellants berate and slap another sex worker signalled to KC, “if not directly, indirectly, the requirement to not violate rules”: at para. 203.

The judge also accepted the evidence of SC: at para. 238. He concluded from her testimony that when she worked with the appellants, “there was an atmosphere of threatened violence if there were violation of rules”: at para. 238. SC left the condominium in which she was working about three weeks after having started with the appellants, without telling them. She was contacted about a week later by the third co-conspirator, who threatened her by “telling her that he knew where her son resided”: at para. 245. Mr. Albashir called shortly thereafter, telling SC that he wanted her to return to work. She testified that but for those calls, she would not have returned: at para. 245.

While in Edmonton with the appellants, SC was interviewed by the police. She was subsequently picked up by the appellants and they told her that she had better not say anything about them. SC testified that she was afraid of what they would do if she communicated with the police: at para. 248.

SC saw “many incidents of violence between [KC] and Mr. Albashir”: at para 249. She saw Mr. Albashir on top of KC and heard “screaming and fighting”: at para. 249. She saw KC with a black eye: at para. 249. She saw another sex worker being beaten by the appellants: at para. 253. SC testified that Mr. Mohsenipour pointed a gun at her and had threatened to kill her: at para. 249. Mr. Albashir told her that he would kill her son and her dog: at para. 254. The judge found there was “an atmosphere which carried the threat of violence, physical or psychological, against [SC]”: at para. 249.

Respectfully, in light of these findings, which form part of the trial judgment, it cannot reasonably be said there was no established link between the financial or other material benefits received by the appellants and the exploitation of KC and SC, or that the verdicts on counts 11 and 18 are unreasonable.

Nor is there any force to the suggestion that the reasons “fail to provide sufficient information regarding why the appellants were convicted” under s. 279.01(2). I accept, as recently noted in R. v. S.S., 2022 BCCA 392, that a trial judge will err in law if they “fail to provide an explanation of their decision that is sufficiently intelligible to permit appellate review”: at para. 83, citing R. v. Sheppard, 2002 SCC 26. However, insufficient intelligibility has not been established here, applying the functional and contextual approach to appellate review that binds this Court. 

Should the Appellants Be Allowed to Raise a Constitutional Issue?

Mr. Albashir filed notice of a constitutional question in July 2019, seeking a declaration that s. 279.01(1) of the Code contravenes ss. 7 and 11(d) of the Charter and cannot be saved by s. 1. The notice sought to have s. 279.01(1) declared unconstitutional to the extent that it allows for a conviction based on a finding that an accused has “facilitated” their own exploitation or someone else’s “facilitation” of their own exploitive conduct. 

The constitutional challenge was advanced as an alternative argument in support of Mr. Albashir’s appeal and would only arise if this Court concluded that the judge convicted him of the s. 279.01(1) offence on the basis of facilitation rather than actual exploitation, and the facilitation was directed towards Mr. Albashir’s exploitation of the complainants rather than someone else’s. Mr. Albashir argues that if s. 279.01(1) is interpreted that way, it is overbroad, vague and grossly disproportionate.

This was not an argument advanced at the trial and, as a result, Mr. Albashir requires leave to pursue it. The Crown opposed leave, taking the position that, among other things, the evidentiary record is insufficient for this Court to properly determine the constitutional complaint.
 
As succinctly explained by Justice Dickson, writing for the Court in R. v. Alfred, 2020 BCCA 384:
 
Appellate courts are especially cautious about hearing a new issue in the absence of a complete evidentiary record if the new issue concerns the constitutional validity of legislation, given the far-reaching consequences of such determinations: R. v. Lilgert, 2014 BCCA 493 at paras. 15, 20. Although new arguments based on an evidentiary record laid out for the first time in the court of appeal are occasionally permitted, such occasions are rare. This is so because appellate courts are not the place to develop an evidentiary record given that “[t]he appellate forum and its procedures are not adapted to the weighing of evidence and the finding of facts”: Roach at para. 8; R. v. J.D., 2018 ONCA 947 at para. 6. That said, where an appellant’s legitimate interest in advancing a new issue outweighs the problems associated with assembling an appropriate record, the interests of justice may favour granting leave to raise the new issue for the first time at the appellate level: J.D. at paras. 6–7. In all cases, the fundamental consideration is whether refusing to allow a new issue to be raised on appeal would risk an injustice: R. v. Mian, 2014 SCC 54 at para. 43; R. v. Brown, 1993 CanLII 114 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 918.

We heard the parties’ submissions on leave at the hearing of the appeal. They were content to rely on their factums for deciding the merits of the constitutional question. I would deny leave and not engage the constitutional issue.

As I have explained, the judge did not find guilt under s. 279.01(1) of the Code on the basis that the appellants “facilitated” their own exploitation of the complainants. Rather, the judge was satisfied, beyond a reasonable doubt, that both appellants committed the actus reus of the s. 279.01(1) offence for the purpose of their own exploitation of KC and SC and to facilitate exploitation by each other. That facilitation was done in furtherance of the joint venture. In the circumstances of this case, the constitutional issue raised by Mr. Albashir does not arise. 

Did the Judge Err in Not Applying “Kienapple”?

After entering convictions against the appellants, the judge did not consider whether some of the convictions should be conditionally stayed on the basis of the Kienapple principle.

In his reasons for sentence, the judge found that although the counts involving NV reflected “separate and distinct periods of exploitation”, the “underlying nature of the offences [were] the same” and they “constitut[ed] a linked series of acts within a single endeavour”: 2019 BCSC 479 at para. 31.

He also found that the “prostitution offences” involving KC and SC reflected a “linked series of acts within a single endeavour”, even with the legislative amendments that resulted in some of their charges being split in two: at para. 29.

The appellants have raised the application of Kienapple on appeal. The Crown does not object to it being addressed here. The failure to apply Kienapple where properly engaged amounts to an error of law. As such, it is reviewed on a correctness standard: R. v. Kennedy, 2016 MBCA 5 at para. 23. 

Kienapple Principle

The Kienapple principle is a legal principle that reflects a long-standing recognition in Canadian criminal law that multiple convictions should not be entered for offences involving the same “delict” (cause or matter). When someone is charged with more than one offence that has the same or substantially the same elements, the Kienapple principle must be considered unless Parliament has clearly expressed its intention to displace the principle by providing for multiple convictions arising from the same matter: R. v. Prince, 2 S.C.R. 480, 1986 CanLII 40 (SCC) at paras. 13, 35. Canadian courts “have long been concerned to see that multiple convictions are not without good reason heaped on an accused in respect of a single criminal delict”: Prince at para. 17.

Whether Kienapple applies is determined case-by-case and contextually informed: Prince at para. 24. The assessment will generally require that a trial judge consider the statutory provisions that create the relevant offences, and the application of those provisions to the circumstances of the case: R. v. Kinnear, 2005 CanLII 21092 (ON CA), 2005 CarswellOnt 2423 (O.N.C.A.), O.J. No. 2434 at para. 36. 

Where Parliament has not expressly displaced the Kienapple principle, there is an analytical framework to follow in deciding whether a conviction should be conditionally stayed. The Supreme Court established the framework in Prince. Trial judges must ask: First, whether there is a “factual nexus” between the offences at issue. The answer to this question is generally determined by considering whether the same act grounds each of the charges: Prince at paras. 21, 24; If a case involves continuing offences in which the offending behaviour occurred or subsisted over a period of time, or the act(s) that make up the offences are described only in general terms, determining whether a “factual nexus” exists may require a trial judge to consider factors such as the remoteness or proximity in time and place between offences, the presence or absence of relevant intervening events, and whether the acts underlying the offences were related to each other by a common objective: Prince at para. 24; Second, once a trial judge is satisfied of a sufficient “factual nexus”, they must then ask whether there is also an “adequate legal nexus” between the relevant offences. This is because a “single act of an accused can involve two or more delicts against society which bear little or no connection the one to the other”: Prince at para. 28. In those circumstances, conditionally staying one of them would not be appropriate. There will only be an “adequate legal nexus” between offences if there is “no additional and distinguishing element that goes to guilt contained in the offence for which a conviction is sought to be precluded”: Prince at para. 36; When offences are factually and legally connected, but distinguishable because they are of “unequal gravity”, it may be appropriate to conditionally stay the lesser offence if that offence does not include additional and distinct elements from the more serious offence: Prince at para. 37; How does a trial judge determine whether the elements of an offence are (or are not) “additional and distinct”? There are at least three ways (Prince at paras. 39–42): 

a) an element of one offence may simply be a particularization of an element that forms the foundation for another offence; 
b) multiple offences may reflect the fact that there is more than one method to prove a single delict; or, 
c) Parliament may have deemed a particular element of an offence to be satisfied by proof of another “because of social policy or inherent difficulties of proof”. Elements of an offence that “serve only as an evidentiary proxy for another element cannot be regarded as distinct or additional elements for the purposes of the rule against multiple convictions”. See also R. v. Andrew (1990) 1990 CanLII 11057 (BC CA), CarswellBC 120, 57 C.C.C. (3d) 301 (B.C.C.A.) at paras. 11, 14.

In R. v. Heaney, 2013 BCCA 177, this Court identified three factors that, subject to Parliament’s clear intention to the contrary, will generally “defeat a claim that different offences have the legal nexus to warrant the application of Kienapple”: at para. 26. They are:

(a) where the offences are designed to protect different societal interests;
(b) where the offences involve violence against different victims; and
(c) where the offences proscribe different consequences: at para. 26. 

Arguments on Appeal

The appellants contend that a number of their convictions should have been conditionally stayed.

Specific to NV, the appellants were convicted of count 2 of the indictment for exercising control, direction or influence over the movements of NV for the purposes of gain, and in a manner that showed they were aiding, abetting or compelling NV to engage in prostitution. Mr. Albashir was also convicted, in count 4, of recruiting, holding, concealing or harbouring NV, or controlling her movements, for the purpose of facilitating the provision of sexual services for consideration. The appellants say the conviction for count 4 should be conditionally stayed. They contend that the elements of these two offences were substantially the same and the only difference between counts 2 and 4 was a “temporal gap”.

The appellants were also convicted of count 3 in respect of NV: living on the avails of the prostitution of NV while she was under 18 and, for the purpose of profit, aiding, abetting or compelling her to engage in prostitution while threatening or using violence against her. Mr. Albashir was additionally convicted, in count 5, of receiving a financial or other material benefit in relation to NV, knowing that it was derived from the provision of sexual services for consideration. The appellants say count 5 should be conditionally stayed on the basis that these two offences were continuing offences, involved essentially the same elements, and the culpable acts captured by counts 3 and 5 were committed in support of a common objective.

In respect of the offences committed against KC, the appellants argue that counts 6, 8 and 11 each involved receiving a financial or other material benefit from sexual services provided by KC. Count 6 charged the appellants with living on the avails of prostitution. Count 8 charged them with receiving a benefit, knowing that it was derived from sexual services provided by KC. Count 11 charged the appellants with receiving a financial or other material benefit from trafficking KC.

The appellants argue that all three of these offences are properly characterized as continuing offences and two of them involve precisely the same timeframe (counts 8 and 11). Counts 6 and 8 are functionally mirror offences and the fact that there are two counts, rather than one, was necessitated solely by the legislative amendments that took effect on December 6, 2014. The appellants say the convictions entered for both counts 6 and 8 should be conditionally stayed.

Counts 7 and 9 are also at issue. Count 7 charged the appellants with exercising control, direction or influence over KC’s movements for the purpose of gain, and in a manner that aided, abetted or compelled KC to engage in prostitution. Count 9 also focused on controlling KC’s movements. The appellants say these too were continuing offences and separate counts were only necessary because of legislative change. As a result, one of them should be conditionally stayed.

Specific to SC, the appellants make the same arguments about counts 13, 15 and 18 that they do in relation to counts 6, 8 and 11. Each of these offences involved receiving a financial or other material benefit from sexual services provided by SC. They ask that the convictions entered for counts 13 and 15 be conditionally stayed.

Counts 14 and 16 charged the appellants with exercising control, direction or influence over SC’s movement. Similar to the argument advanced in respect of KC, the appellants say these are continuing offences and separate counts were necessitated solely because of legislative change. Consequently, one of them should be conditionally stayed.

At sentencing, the Crown set out the Kienapple principle and said it had no application to this case. It takes the same position on appeal, submitting that Kienapple does not apply to offences that occur at different times, “as there is no factual nexus between an act committed today and the same type of act done in the future”. As such, the counts in the indictment that represent either side of the December 2014 legislative amendments do not cancel each other out. They each capture periods of time in which the appellants were engaged in criminality on a daily basis by virtue of their ongoing “escort” operation. The fact that Parliament amended the relevant offence provisions in the midst of that operation should not insulate them from liability for their multiple infractions. The Crown contends that the other convictions sought to be conditionally stayed by the appellants have distinct elements, are not duplicative or alternatives to one another, and none of them constitute lesser or included offences.

From the Crown’s perspective, this is not a case in which the Court “should be concerned that multiple convictions are being heaped on [the appellants] in respect of a single criminal act”. 

Analysis

Applying the Prince framework, I have concluded that the convictions entered for counts 6, 7, 13 and 14 of the indictment should be conditionally stayed. I recognize that counts 6 and 13 involve convictions restored by this Court in 2020 BCCA 160; however, that appeal was focused on whether the judge had erroneously quashed counts 6 and 13 on constitutional grounds. The Court was not asked to consider or apply Kienapple in the context of the Crown’s appeal.
 
Counts 6, 7, 13 and 14 charged the appellants with offences under ss. 212(1)(j) and 212(1)(h) of the Code. KC and SC were the named victims:

212(1) Every one who …
(j) lives wholly or in part on the avails of prostitution of another person, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years.

212(1) Every one who …
(h) for the purposes of gain, exercises control, direction or influence over the movements of a person in such manner as to show that he is aiding, abetting or compelling that person to engage in or carry on prostitution with any person or generally, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years. [Emphasis added.]

Counts 6, 7, 13 and 14 could only encompass criminal conduct alleged to have been committed up to and including December 5, 2014 because of Parliament’s amendments to the Code’s prostitution-related offences.

Count 8, 9, 15 and 16 charged the appellants with offences under ss. 286.2(1) and 286.3(1). These counts could only encompass criminal conduct alleged to have been committed after December 5, 2014 because of Parliament’s amendments to the Code’s prostitution-related offences.
 
KC and SC were also the named victims of these offences: 

286.2 (1) Every person who receives a financial or other material benefit, knowing that it is obtained by or derived directly or indirectly from the commission of an offence under subsection 286.1(1) [obtaining sexual services for consideration], is guilty of 
(a) an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than 10 years; or 
(b) an offence punishable on summary conviction. 

286.3 (1) Everyone who procures a person to offer or provide sexual services for consideration or, for the purpose of facilitating an offence under subsection 286.1(1), recruits, holds, conceals or harbours a person who offers or provides sexual services for consideration, or exercises control, direction or influence over the movements of that person, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than 14 years. [Emphasis added.]

I consider there to be both a close factual and legal nexus between these two sets of counts. In the circumstances of this case, counts 6, 7, 13 and 14 (the first set) and counts 8, 9, 15 and 16 (the second set), address “single wrong(s) or delict(s)”: R. v. Meszaros, 2013 ONCA 682 at para. 32.

All of these counts were charged as global counts and continuing offences. By “continuing offences”, I am referring to the fact that the factual matrix underlying each offence consisted of a number of acts committed over a period of time: Heaney at para. 31. The two sets of counts were intended to capture the whole of the appellants’ offending conduct under ss. 212 and 286 of the Code, specific to KC and SC, as between March 2014 and April 2016, and in the context of the appellants’ joint venture. It is for this reason, presumably, that the judge described the offences in his reasons for sentence as a “linked series of acts within a single endeavour”: 2019 BCSC 479 at para. 29. In its factum, the Crown does not dispute that the acts that formed the basis for counts 6, 7, 8, 9, 13, 14, 15 and 16 were “linked in a scheme”. In other words, they “were related to each other by a common objective”: Prince at para. 24.

But for the legislative changes that took effect on December 6, 2014, it would not have been necessary for the Crown to charge counts 8, 9, 15 and 16. Instead, the dates of the offences delineated in counts 6, 7, 13 and 14 would have been more expansive, extending beyond December 5, 2014 and capturing the entirety of the charged conduct. As noted in 2020 BCCA 160, s. 212 of the Code was repealed and, in its place, Parliament created the “material benefit offence” now found in s. 286.2. The latter provision attempts “to respond to the constitutional infirmities [found to exist under s. 212] relating to security of the person identified in Bedford”: at para. 51. Sections 286.1, 286.2 and 286.3 address the same conduct that was previously captured by s. 212, but “[carve] out several exceptions … for non-exploitive relations to persist despite one person receiving a material benefit from the commission of the purchasing offence in s. 286.1”: at para. 51.

I do not consider the December 6, 2014 amendments to be the type of “intervening event” contemplated by the Supreme Court in Côté v. The Queen, 1974 CanLII 137 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 303, 49 D.L.R. (3d) 574, which would justify multiple convictions (see also Prince at para. 24). The changes to the offence provisions did not sever the factual continuum underlying the two sets of convictions.

The Crown says that if this Court conditionally stays the convictions entered for counts 6, 7, 13 and 14, the appellants will be left unaccountable for proved criminal conduct that predated December 5, 2014, and their criminal records and punishment will not accurately reflect the duration of their offending or its gravity. The Crown contends that Kienapple never intended this kind of a result.
 
Counsel did not refer us to any authorities in which legislative amendments have occurred in the midst of a continuing offence. However, in support of its position, the Crown points to the approach taken in cases such as R. v. B. (F.F.), 1991 CanLII 4573 (NS CA), 1991 CarswellNS 27 (N.S.C.A.), 69 C.C.C. (3d) 193, rev’d on other grounds, 1993 CanLII 167 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 697, 1993 CarswellNS 13. In that case, the appellant was charged with multiple sexual offences against the same victim extending over many years. On appeal, the Nova Scotia Supreme Court Appellate Division considered whether the circumstances properly engaged the Kienapple principle. The majority held that it did not:

The court also asked for submissions relating to the Kienapple principle. After reviewing the case … and the submissions made by the Crown and the appellant, I am satisfied that the Kienapple principle does not come into play here simply due to the fact that all of the convictions relate to distinctive sets of fact … 90

There were numerous assaults, sexual and otherwise, occurring over the 10-year period. The Crown chose to lay six charges which would be much less confusing than laying the multitude which the evidence could support. The Crown's approach in this way appears to me to be restrained and conservative and led to a simplification of the issues for the jury …

I accept the Crown’s submission that all of these charges related to separate incidents occurring at different times. Kienapple has no application. It was appropriate for the trial judge to sentence the appellant on each of the counts on which he was found guilty. [Internal references omitted; emphasis added.]

This case is qualitatively different than B. (F.F.).

Here, the Crown did not charge the appellants with individualized counts under ss. 212, 286.2 and 286.3 of the Code, with each count reflecting a “separate incident” that “occurred at [a] different [time]”: B. (F.F.) at para. 91. Instead, the Crown charged the appellants globally, bundling their conduct, over time, into all encompassing counts. Then, because of the December 2014 amendments, what would have otherwise been one count each under ss. 212(1)(j) and (1)(h), became two counts. However, the “delict” sought to be addressed by the second set of counts remained the same, namely, receiving a financial or other material benefit knowing that it was derived from the provision of sexual services for consideration (s. 286.2), and exercising control, direction or influence over the movements of a person who provided sexual services for consideration (s. 286.3). (See also 2020 BCCA 160 at para. 86.)

For these reasons, I consider it proper to conditionally stay the convictions entered for counts 6 and 7 (involving KC), and counts 13 and 14 (involving SC). The counterpart convictions in counts 8 and 9 (involving KC), and counts 15 and 16 (involving SC), should remain intact. The period of offending captured in the latter counts is longer than the stayed counts (thereby better reflecting the gravity of the appellants’ conduct), and s. 286.3 of the Code carries a higher penalty range than the former s. 212(1)(h). In light of these factors, it is appropriate that the convictions be registered for the more serious offences: R. v. Loyer, 1978 CanLII 194 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 631, 1978 CarswellQue 119.

I would not accede to the appellants’ Kienapple arguments in respect of any other counts.

I will begin with counts 2 and 4 involving NV.

Both appellants were charged in count 2 with exercising control, direction or influence over NV’s movements for the purpose of gain: Code, s. 212(1)(h). The offence dates were July 1, 2013 to July 1, 2014. Count 4 applied only to Mr. Albashir. He was charged with recruiting, holding, concealing, harbouring, or exercising control, direction or influence over NV’s movements for the purpose of facilitating the provision of sexual services for consideration. The offence dates in count 4 were December 26, 2015 to January 23, 2016. This offence post-dates count 2 by more than one year.

Count 2 represented the period in which NV was first involved with the appellants. Count 4 captured a different period, and one that arose subsequent to intervening events, namely: NV stopped working for the appellants, resided elsewhere, and “worked independently”: at para. 89.

Evidence at the trial established that in 2014, NV was told to leave the appellants’ operation because she brought a boyfriend to the condominium where she was working, which was contrary to Mr. Albashir’s wishes: at para. 88. NV began to work independently: at para. 89. She later moved in with a friend, Mr. Schafer: at para. 89. Mr. Albashir resumed contact with NV in the fall of 2015, and she agreed to return to work for the appellants in downtown Vancouver: at para. 90. Mr. Albashir picked up NV in January 2016 and moved her into a condominium on West Georgia Street in Vancouver. The “financial and working conditions were the same as before. Money was split between [NV] and [the appellants]”: at para. 91.

In my view, count 4 represents a separate and distinct set of events and acts from those addressed in count 2. There is no factual nexus between these counts. The offences were separate in time and the acts that underlay these counts were severed by a cessation of the relationship between the parties and NV living and working elsewhere.

The appellants also say that one of counts 3 and 5 should be stayed.

Count 3 charged the appellants with an aggravated form of living on the avails arising out of the fact that NV was under the age of 18: Code, s. 212(2.1). The dates for this offence were July 1, 2013 to July 1, 2014. Count 5 applied only to Mr. Albashir. It charged him with receiving a financial or material benefit derived from sexual services provided for consideration: s. 286.2. The dates for this offence were December 26, 2015 to January 23, 2016.

I would not apply the Kienapple principle to the convictions entered for counts 3 and 5 for substantially the same reasons that I say the principle is not engaged in relation to counts 2 and 4. Count 5 represents a separate and distinct set of events from count 3 and these events arose after an intervening event that severed the factual connection between NV and Mr. Albashir. Count 5 only arose once NV reconnected with Mr. Albashir in the fall of 2015. She began to work for them again in January 2016. There is no factual nexus between the counts.

That brings me to KC.
 
I have already found that the convictions on counts 6 and 7 should be conditionally stayed. The convictions on counts 8 and 9 should remain intact. The appellants also contend that a conditional stay is appropriate for count 11, which charged the appellants with an offence under s. 279.02(1) of the Code. The elements of this offence were set out earlier in these reasons. For convenience:

279.02 (1) Every person who receives a financial or other material benefit, knowing that it is obtained by or derived directly or indirectly from the commission of an offence under subsection 279.01(1), is guilty of
(a) an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than 10 years; or
(b) an offence punishable on summary conviction. [Emphasis added.] The dates of the offences in count 11 were December 6, 2014 to April 16, 2016. They mirror the dates in count 8.
 
Section 279.01(1), which is expressly referred to in s. 279.02(1), has also been set out earlier in these reasons. Again, for convenience:

279.01 (1) Every person who recruits, transports, transfers, receives, holds, conceals or harbours a person, or exercises control, direction or influence over the movements of a person, for the purpose of exploiting them or facilitating their exploitation is guilty of an indictable offence and liable
(a) to imprisonment for life and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of five years if they kidnap, commit an aggravated assault or aggravated sexual assault against, or cause death to, the victim during the commission of the offence; or
(b) to imprisonment for a term of not more than 14 years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of four years in any other case.

I accept that there is a factual nexus between counts 8 and 11. The same acts underlie both counts, namely, deriving a financial or other material benefit from the provision of sexual services for consideration. However, the appellants have not persuaded me of a legal nexus between counts 8 and 11.

Count 11 includes an “additional and distinguishing element”: Prince at para. 36. Section 279.02(1) is aimed at financial or other material benefits derived from human trafficking, which requires proof of conduct that is purposefully exploitive or intended to facilitate exploitation. Sections 286.2(1) and 279.02(1) protect distinct societal interests: Heaney at para. 26. They are not interchangeable. An offence under s. 286.1(1) can be committed without also violating s. 279.02(1). In this case, the judge found that the appellants derived financial or other material benefits from KC’s sex work, but, in addition to that, they profited from conduct that was itself exploitive, or designed to facilitate KC’s exploitation.

Finally, I turn to SC.

I have already found that the convictions on counts 13 and 14 should be conditionally stayed. The convictions on counts 15 and 16 should remain intact. On the same basis that they seek a conditional stay of count 11, the appellants contend that count 18 should be “Kienappled”. Like count 11, this offence charged the appellants under s. 279.02(1) of the Code, specific to SC. The offence dates in count 18, December 6, 2014 to August 31, 2015, mirror the offence dates in count 16.

I would not accede to the appellants’ arguments in respect of count 18, for the same reasons that I do not consider it appropriate to conditionally stay the conviction for count 11. Although there is a factual nexus between these counts, there is no legal nexus. 

Disposition

For the reasons provided, I would allow the appeals from conviction in CA45957 (Kasra Mohsenipour) and CA45961 (Tamim Albashir), but only to the extent that the convictions in counts 6, 7, 13 and 14 are conditionally stayed to give effect to the Kienapple principle.

I would dismiss all other grounds of appeal.

I would not admit the fresh evidence in support of the non-disclosure ground of appeal, to the extent that the fresh evidence includes materials that do not already form part of the trial record in the court below.


./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/ca/2023bcca3.html

James Wilkinson and another man were walking late at night on a street in Duncan, B.C. Mr. Wilkinson was wearing a backpack. Plainclothes police officers on patrol observed them and concluded that the two were acting suspiciously. When the men suddenly ran in the opposite direction into a vacant lot, the officers pursued them on foot. Mr. Wilkinson was eventually detained. The police recovered the backpack, which had been discarded by Mr. Wilkinson during the pursuit. A search of his backpack revealed that it contained a quantity of illicit drugs among other things. Mr. Wilkinson was later convicted of two counts of possession of a controlled substance for the purpose of trafficking and one count of possession of a controlled substance. He appeals those convictions.

This appeal raises issues of arbitrary detention, the unreasonable search and seizure of the backpack, and whether there was timely compliance with the informational component of ss. 10(a) and (b) of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.

I would dismiss the appeal. 

Background

On July 13, 2019, Constable Houlgate and Corporal March of the RCMP were assigned to a “street crime unit” in Duncan, B.C., a small community on Vancouver Island. The officers were in plainclothes. Cst. Houlgate was driving an unmarked police vehicle and Cpl. March was the passenger. The officers were on patrol and not investigating any specific crime. 

At around 11:30 p.m., while driving on Howard St., Cst. Houlgate noticed two men walking on the sidewalk next to a vacant lot. They were wearing dark clothing, looking around a lot, and according to Cst. Houlgate, appearing “skittish”. One of the men, later identified as Mr. Wilkinson, was wearing a backpack. When the officers slowed down for a stop sign, they looked at the men to see if they recognized them — they did not. There had been a theft in the area, and a suspect had been identified. The officers confirmed at that time that neither man was the suspect in the theft.

The two men suddenly turned and ran in the opposite direction, away from the police car and into a vacant lot at the corner of Howard and Dingwall Streets. One of the men fled and got away from police. There did not appear to be any reason, other than the police presence, to cause the men to run.

Initially, Cst. Houlgate reversed the car and turned it so the headlights were on the vacant lot. They did not use any siren or emergency lights. Mr. Wilkinson, still wearing the backpack, came running out of the lot and ran southbound. Cst. Houlgate attempted to intercept him with the vehicle. 

Both officers got out of the car, calling out “stop police”. Mr. Wilkinson ran back into the vacant lot, tripped over a fence, and fell down. When told to stop, Mr. Wilkinson looked at Cpl. March, said “okay”, but then kept running. He tripped over another fence, fell, and managed to get up and keep running. When he came out of the lot, he no longer had the backpack and was not wearing shoes. Cst. Houlgate called out “stop police” again, but Mr. Wilkinson continued running until he tripped and fell a third time, when the police caught up to him. This sequence of events took one to two minutes. Mr. Wilkinson struggled causing the officers to handcuff him behind his back. He was detained to prevent him from fleeing and to identify him.

Cst. Houlgate believed he had grounds to detain the individuals when he started the pursuit. While he did not have a specific offence in mind, he based his grounds on the following facts: the area was known as a high-crime area with a lot of drug and property crimes; it was dark and late at night (11:30 p.m.); the “skittish” behaviour of the individuals of repeatedly looking around, the flight from police; and, the presence of a backpack, which could be used to hold break and enter tools, drugs, weapons, or stolen property. The flight from the scene was the “main trigger” for Cst. Houlgate. In his mind, someone fleeing in those circumstances either had a warrant for their arrest or were involved in committing a crime. He wanted to find out why they were running.
 
Once Mr. Wilkinson was detained, Cst. Houlgate left him with Cpl. March while he searched for the backpack as he believed it would contain evidence. He was also concerned because he did not know where the other person had gone.
 
He found one of Mr. Wilkinson’s shoes by the second fence; the backpack and the other shoe were by the first fence. He returned to where Cpl. March was detaining Mr. Wilkinson as there was better light to conduct a search of the backpack. Another one to two minutes had passed.
 
In the meantime, Cpl. March did not tell Mr. Wilkinson why he was detained or advise him of his right to counsel. Cp. March said he was trying to catch his breath. He asked Mr. Wilkinson’s name and why he was running. Mr. Wilkinson replied that he was worried that he was going to get shot. Cpl. March testified to this statement on the voir dire, but the Crown made it clear that they were not tendering the statement. The statement was also given in cross-examination; however, counsel agreed that the trial judge should not consider it.
 
Cst. Houlgate returned with the backpack and the shoes. He advised Mr. Wilkinson he was under arrest for trafficking, as he had looked in the backpack and seen some of the contents. Mr. Wilkinson was advised of his right to counsel at the same time. That occurred at 11:36 p.m. He was given access to counsel at the RCMP detachment.
 
Cst. Houlgate testified that his ground for searching the backpack was because he believed that it was abandoned property. The backpack was found to include an envelope containing $1,035 cash; a bag with $1,330 cash; 97.3 grams of heroin/fentanyl; 4.9 grams of crack cocaine; 7.7 grams of powder cocaine; 0.5 grams of methamphetamine; 53.4 grams of caffeine; a purple cellphone charging cord, and a tag for a Mercedes-Benz. A key for a Mercedes-Benz and a cellphone matching the cord were found on Mr. Wilkinson’s person. 

Trial Judge’s Reasons Voir Dire ruling
 
Mr. Wilkinson challenged his detention, arrest, search, and right to counsel under ss. 8, 9, 10(a), and 10(b) of the Charter. The trial judge’s ruling on the Charter applications is indexed at 2020 BCSC 2230 (“Voir Dire Ruling”).
 
The trial judge first considered Mr. Wilkinson’s position that he was arbitrarily detained without grounds. Relying on R. v. Mann, 2004 SCC 52, he stated that if Mr. Wilkinson was validly detained, it was based on an investigative detention: Voir Dire Ruling at para. 11. He noted that Mann provides that police have authority to detain for investigative purposes if there are reasonable grounds to suspect the individual is connected to a particular crime. He explained that the test for investigative detention is a lower threshold than the reasonable and probable grounds required for lawful arrests. Relying on Mann and R. v. Reddy, 2010 BCCA 11, the trial judge also recognized that for detention and arrest, the police must subjectively believe that the requisite standard has been met, and the belief must be objectively reasonable: Voir Dire Ruling at para. 13.
 
The trial judge then turned to the testimony of Cst. Houlgate and the basis for the officer’s subjective belief. Cst. Houlgate testified he believed there were grounds to detain Mr. Wilkinson because: 

(1) the area was a high‑crime area and the “ground zero” area for crime in Duncan; 
(2) it was dark and late at night (11:30 p.m.), and the two men were wearing dark clothing and one had a backpack; 
(3) the police were driving an unmarked police vehicle, but the vehicle was well-known in the community as being used by the police as an undercover vehicle; and, 
(4) the men started running after the car passed them, even though the police did not identify themselves until their vehicle stopped and they got out.
 
The judge then considered whether the enumerated factors were objectively reasonable. He found that at the time the police first observed the two men, they were not doing anything objectionable. He was skeptical that everyone in Duncan knew the unmarked vehicle belonged to police even though that was the perception of the police. As such, he found there was no evidence as to whether Mr. Wilkinson knew that the car belonged to the police. In a similar vein, he also noted that the two police officers were in plainclothes. He then found that running away from an unmarked car late at night in a high-crime area did not support the level of suspicion necessary to justify an investigative detention. He stated that something more than a suspicion or hunch is required to reach the level of a reasonable suspicion: at para. 22. Furthermore, he concluded that there was no evidence that Mr. Wilkinson was committing a crime when he was seen running from the police vehicle. Neither being in a high-crime area or carrying a backpack supported a reasonable suspicion: at para. 24. Running away from the unmarked vehicle may give rise to a hunch, but that was not sufficient.
 
Accordingly, the judge concluded that Mr. Wilkinson was arbitrarily detained.
 
In terms of whether the search and seizure were unreasonable, he concluded that Mr. Wilkinson abandoned the backpack in an area owned by a third-party unknown to him while running away from police, and therefore, there was no violation of s. 8 of the Charter as a result of the search of the backpack.
 
The judge then addressed ss. 10(a) and (b) and laid out a timeline of the events. The police testified they first saw the men at about 11:30 p.m. Mr. Wilkinson was advised of his right to counsel at 11:36 p.m. He stated that the evidence was that Mr. Wilkinson was given his ss. 10(a) and (b) warnings a short time after his detention. He concluded that Mr. Wilkinson was informed of his right to counsel within two to six minutes of his detention which was prompt and without any delay. 

Ruling on section 24(2)
 
Finding an arbitrary detention, the trial judge turned to s. 24(2) of the Charter in his reasons indexed at 2020 BCSC 2231 (“Ruling on 24(2)”). The trial judge set out the framework of s. 24(2), noting that the onus was on Mr. Wilkinson to show that the evidence was obtained in a manner that infringed his rights and that admitting the evidence would bring the administration of justice into disrepute.
 
On the first step, the issue was whether the backpack and items on Mr. Wilkinson’s person were obtained in a manner that infringed his Charter rights and freedoms. He considered the Crown’s position that his finding on the voir dire that Mr. Wilkinson had abandoned the backpack was significant. He drew an analogy to the “garbage” cases, such as R. v. Patrick, 2009 SCC 17, where the evidence at issue was taken from garbage bags the accused had left in a public alleyway. The Supreme Court found that the accused had abandoned any reasonable expectation of privacy because he had done what was required for the bags to be picked up by the municipal collection system. The judge noted that while the backpack was not abandoned in a public place, it was left in a place that appeared to be abandoned: Ruling on 24(2) at para. 13. Unlike other garbage cases, there was no extension of his private property dwelling rights to the backpack because he did not live where the backpack had been abandoned.
 
He then briefly discussed R. v. Edwards, 1 S.C.R. 128, 1996 CanLII 255 where the Supreme Court found there was no expectation of privacy in the accused’s girlfriend’s residence and that no personal right of the accused was affected by police conduct; therefore, he could not contest the admissibility of the evidence under s. 24(2) of the Charter. He then concluded that Mr. Wilkinson abandoned any privacy interest in the backpack when he ran away from it. As a result, he did not have standing to claim his property in the bag. He concluded that its contents were not obtained in a manner that infringed or denied Mr. Wilkinson’s rights or freedoms. He stated that this was sufficient to dispose of the s. 24(2) issue, but he went on to briefly review the issues related to the administration of justice.
 
The trial judge discussed the three lines of inquiry the Supreme Court set out in R. v. Grant, 2009 SCC 32: (1) the seriousness of the Charter-infringing state conduct; (2) the impact of the breach on the accused’s Charter-protected interests; and (3) society’s interest in the adjudication of the case on its merits. First, he discussed the seriousness of the Charter-infringing state conduct. Based on the police having a valid subjective belief in the grounds for detention, the entire incident lasting mere minutes, there being no pattern of abuse or extreme measures, and the police having no reasonable suspicion to detain Mr. Wilkinson, the trial judge concluded the action of the police was on the minor end of the spectrum and favoured the admission of the backpack and its contents: at para. 19. 
 
Second, he assessed the impact on the Charter interests of Mr. Wilkinson. He accepted that the detention negatively affected Mr. Wilkinson’s liberty, but he reiterated that the entire incident only took a few minutes. He found Mr. Wilkinson’s privacy interest was not violated, which also favoured the admission of the evidence.
 
Third, he considered society’s interest in adjudication of the case on its merits. He stated that the exclusion of highly reliable evidence may have a more negative impact on the repute of the administration of justice when the remedy “guts” the prosecution. The Crown submitted that excluding the evidence would gut its case. The trial judge found that was worth some significant weight. He noted that the evidence at issue was physical and considered inherently reliable. He also commented that there was no suggestion the backpack did not belong to Mr. Wilkinson before he abandoned it or that it had been tampered with. He found the truth-seeking function of the justice system would be better served by the admission of the backpack and its contents, which favoured the admission of the evidence.
 
The judge then considered the items found on Mr. Wilkinson’s person, namely the cellphone and Mercedes-Benz item. He found the conduct of the police was not reckless, but rather was a routine search incidental to his arrest. Mr. Wilkinson had a privacy interest in his person, but the search was not intrusive. The exclusion of the items would not gut the case, but it was physical evidence and there was no dispute about their ownership. The judge concluded they were admissible.
 
The judge dismissed the application to exclude the evidence at issue.
 
Mr. Wilkinson did not testify at the voir dire or trial proper.
 
The judge issued separate reasons for conviction indexed at 2020 BCSC 2234. The judge reviewed the procedural background and set out the agreed statement of facts. He concluded that the Crown had proved beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Wilkinson had possession of the backpack with $2,365 cash and heroin/fentanyl valued between $7,200 and $19,460. The cocaine was valued at $820. The judge found Mr. Wilkinson guilty of possession of methamphetamine and of possession of heroin/fentanyl and cocaine for the purposes of trafficking. 

Issues on Appeal
 
Mr. Wilkinson argues that the judge erred in concluding that there were no breaches of his Charter rights as a result of the search of his backpack and the failure to provide him with his ss. 10(a) and (b) rights in a timely manner. He further submits that the judge erred in admitting the evidence of the search of the backpack, pursuant to s. 24(2).
 
The Crown submits that the judge erred in finding that Mr. Wilkinson was arbitrarily detained. 

Position of the Parties
 
Mr. Wilkinson argues that the judge erred in finding that he abandoned the backpack and had no standing to assert a privacy interest in the backpack. He says there is no evidence that he had “thrown” the backpack, as neither officer had seen how he had become separated from the backpack as he tried to run away. 
 
He further submits that the search of his backpack was not a search incidental to investigative detention, as the judge correctly found that he was arbitrarily detained. Even if he had been lawfully detained, the search went beyond what is permitted as incidental to detention.
 
Mr. Wilkinson also submits that the judge erred in concluding that there was no violation of his ss. 10(a) and (b) rights. He was not given his Charter rights until Cst. Houlgate returned with the backpack. Despite not reading him his rights, Cpl. March questioned him about why he was running.
 
Finally, Mr. Wilkinson contends that the judge erred by failing to exclude the evidence found in the backpack pursuant to s. 24(2) of the Charter. He submits that the judge made errors in his fact-finding in terms of when his s. 10 rights were read to him. Mr. Wilkinson contends that the judge erred in assessing the impact of the breach. Finally, he says the trial judge erred in his analysis of the third branch of the Grant test.
 
The Crown submits the judge erred in concluding that the detention of Mr. Wilkinson was arbitrary. The Crown says the judge erred in the application of the reasonable suspicion test and failed to consider all of the evidence.
 
The Crown contends that the judge made no error in finding that the backpack had been abandoned and that Mr. Wilkinson had no reasonable expectation of privacy. 
 
The Crown submits that, in the circumstances, the short delay between detention and arrest was sufficient for the trial judge to conclude that there was no breach; in their view, this conclusion was reasonable.
 
The Crown’s position first, is that there were no breaches of Mr. Wilkinson’s rights, but if the judge was correct in his conclusion that the detention of Mr. Wilkinson was arbitrary, the conclusion to admit the evidence pursuant to s. 24(2) should be given deference and not be overturned. 

Discussion Did the trial judge err in finding that there was an arbitrary detention?
 
Section 9 of the Charter states: 

Everyone has the right not to be arbitrarily detained or imprisoned.
 
The purpose of s. 9 is to protect individual liberty from unjustified state interference: R. v. Tim, 2022 SCC 12, citing Grant at para. 20. Section 9 protects “the right of individuals to walk the streets free from interference”: Mann at para. 1. In Mann, the Court was required “to balance individual liberty rights and privacy interests with a societal interest in effective policing”: at para. 15.
 
Whether the appellant was detained raises a question of law, which is reviewable on a standard of correctness: R. v. Lafrance, 2022 SCC 32 at 23. In R. v. Le, 2019 SCC 34, the Court explained the applicable standard of review regarding detentions at paras. 23–24:
 
Before engaging in any analysis in this appeal, it is necessary to identify the applicable standard of review. Questions of law on an appeal attract a standard of correctness (R. v. Shepherd, 2009 SCC 35, 2 S.C.R. 527, at para. 18). Questions of fact attract a palpable and overriding error standard (para. 18). The application of the law to a given factual matrix, that is, whether a legal standard is met, amounts to a question of law and attracts a correctness standard (Shepherd, at para. 20; Grant, at para. 43).
 
In this judgment, we have respected, and used, the trial judge’s findings of fact to assess whether the lower courts were correct in their assessment of when a detention occurred. Here, the timing of the detention turned on when a reasonable person would perceive they were under compulsion and not free to leave. An appeals court is entitled to have a different view of the impact that police conduct would have on a reasonable person in the shoes of the accused. This is not, contrary to our colleague’s view, recasting the record, but rather engaging in the same type of legitimate review routinely conducted by appeals courts across this country.
 
There is no issue about whether Mr. Wilkinson was detained; therefore, I will focus on whether the detention was arbitrary. 
 
A lawful detention is not arbitrary: Mann at para. 20. An investigative detention short of arrest is permissible if conducted based on reasonable suspicion: see Grant at para. 55.
 
In Mann, the Court set out the test for investigative detention as follows:
 
The case law raises several guiding principles governing the use of a police power to detain for investigative purposes. The evolution of the Waterfield test, along with the Simpson articulable cause requirement, calls for investigative detentions to be premised upon reasonable grounds. The detention must be viewed as reasonably necessary on an objective view of the totality of the circumstances, informing the officer’s suspicion that there is a clear nexus between the individual to be detained and a recent or on-going criminal offence. Reasonable grounds figures at the front-end of such an assessment, underlying the officer’s reasonable suspicion that the particular individual is implicated in the criminal activity under investigation. The overall reasonableness of the decision to detain, however, must further be assessed against all of the circumstances, most notably the extent to which the interference with individual liberty is necessary to perform the officer’s duty, the liberty interfered with, and the nature and extent of that interference, in order to meet the second prong of the Waterfield test.
 
The judge interpreted the above-noted passage as requiring a specific crime investigation to be underway when the detention occurs. Subsequent decisions have clarified that is not always the case. 
 
The judge appears not to have been provided with R. v. Chehil, 2013 SCC 49 — a more recent consideration of s. 9 that sets out the test for what amounts to reasonable suspicion. Chehil involved a sniff search of a suitcase by a dog trained to detect illicit drugs. One issue raised in the case was when the individual factors relied on by the police for forming reasonable suspicion are capable of innocent explanations. In concluding that the police had “a reasonable suspicion”, the Court clarified the test.
 
The Court concluded that all the circumstances were to be assessed collectively even though there may be innocent explanations:
 
Reasonable suspicion derives its rigour from the requirement that it be based on objectively discernible facts, which can then be subjected to independent judicial scrutiny. This scrutiny is exacting, and must account for the totality of the circumstances. In Kang-Brown, Binnie J. provided the following definition of reasonable suspicion, at para. 75: The “reasonable suspicion” standard is not a new juridical standard called into existence for the purposes of this case. “Suspicion” is an expectation that the targeted individual is possibly engaged in some criminal activity. A “reasonable” suspicion means something more than a mere suspicion and something less than a belief based upon reasonable and probable grounds.
 
Thus, while reasonable grounds to suspect and reasonable and probable grounds to believe are similar in that they both must be grounded in objective facts, reasonable suspicion is a lower standard, as it engages the reasonable possibility, rather than probability, of crime. As a result, when applying the reasonable suspicion standard, reviewing judges must be cautious not to conflate it with the more demanding reasonable and probable grounds standard. …
 
Reasonable suspicion must be assessed against the totality of the circumstances. The inquiry must consider the constellation of objectively discernible facts that are said to give the investigating officer reasonable cause to suspect that an individual is involved in the type of criminal activity under investigation. This inquiry must be fact-based, flexible, and grounded in common sense and practical, everyday experience: see R. v. Bramley, 2009 SKCA 49, 324 Sask. R. 286, at para. 60. A police officer’s grounds for reasonable suspicion cannot be assessed in isolation: see Monney, at para. 50.
 
The Court examined some conduct that may amount to reasonable suspicion on its own, or as part of the constellation of factors taken as a whole. One of the factors that could support reasonable suspicion on its own was flight from the police. The Court said at paras. 31: 
 
While some factors, such as travelling under a false name, or flight from the police, may give rise to reasonable suspicion on their own (Kang-Brown, at para. 87, per Binnie J.), other elements of a constellation will not support reasonable suspicion, except in combination with other factors. Generally, characteristics that apply broadly to innocent people are insufficient, as they are markers only of generalized suspicion. The same is true of factors that may “go both ways”, such as an individual’s making or failing to make eye contact. On their own, such factors cannot support reasonable suspicion; however, this does not preclude reasonable suspicion arising when the same factor is simply one part of a constellation of factors.
 
The Court additionally affirmed that even if innocent explanations arise on the evidence, that does not necessarily diminish the fact that the evidence may also support reasonable suspicion.
 
Further, reasonable suspicion need not be the only inference that can be drawn from a particular constellation of factors. Much as the seven stars that form the Big Dipper have also been interpreted as a bear, a saucepan, and a plough, factors that give rise to a reasonable suspicion may also support completely innocent explanations. This is acceptable, as the reasonable suspicion standard addresses the possibility of uncovering criminality, and not a probability of doing so. [Emphasis in original.]
 
The Court also clarified that there was no necessity for evidence of a specific known criminal act, but it requires conduct that points to the possibility of criminal behaviour. At para. 35, the Court opined:
 
Finally, the objective facts must be indicative of the possibility of criminal behaviour. While I agree with the appellant’s submission that police must point to particularized conduct or particularized evidence of criminal activity in order to ground reasonable suspicion, I do not accept that the evidence must itself consist of unlawful behaviour, or must necessarily be evidence of a specific known criminal act.
 
The trial judge concluded that running away from an unmarked police car at night in a high-crime area did not support the level of suspicion to justify an investigative detention. He concluded that the officers were operating on a “hunch” and that there was “no evidence Mr. Wilkinson was committing a crime when he was seen running from the police vehicle”: Voir Dire Ruling at para. 24. He accepted that the officers had subjective reasonable suspicion, but that it was not objectively reasonable.
 
In my view, the trial judge erred in his analysis and conclusion with respect to whether Mr. Wilkinson was detained. The judge failed to consider the entirety of the circumstances. He concluded that Mr. Wilkinson was entitled to walk around at night in a high-crime area wearing dark clothes. That conclusion, in and of itself, is unassailable. But there was more evidence to collectively consider. Yet, the judge went on to conclude that the flight in and of itself, did not amount to reasonable suspicion because there was no evidence Mr. Wilkinson was committing a crime plus there was an innocent explanation for his flight, that he was afraid of being shot. This conclusion does not take into account the reasoning from Chehil that suggests that factors such as flight from police can give rise to reasonable suspicion on their own. Furthermore, as noted above, there is no need for the police to be investigating a specific crime, particularly when they are conducting a community patrol. The fact of a potentially innocent explanation (which parenthetically, the judge had accepted was not evidence before him) does not eliminate the inference of a guilty conscience from the flight — both inferences are available and can objectively support a reasonable suspicion. In his analysis, the judge discounted each piece of evidence individually, rather than considering the evidence as a whole.
 
In my opinion, the judge, by failing to consider the entire circumstances, and in particular, how those circumstances coalesced, erred in concluding that Mr. Wilkinson’s detention was arbitrary. The evidence viewed as a whole supports a subjective and objective suspicion that entitled the police to detain Mr. Wilkinson. In my view, when the test is correctly applied, the evidence supports a reasonable suspicion as opposed to a “hunch”.
 
Although Mr. Wilkinson was lawfully detained, that does not end the matter in terms of the search of his backpack. While the police are entitled to perform a search of the person when they are lawfully detained, that search may not have included Mr. Wilkinson’s backpack if it had been with him at the time he was detained: see Mann at para. 45. Indeed, the Crown did not argue on appeal that the search of the backpack was pursuant to a lawful investigative detention. I turn now to the issue of whether the judge correctly concluded that the backpack had been abandoned. 

Did the trial judge err in concluding that the search was reasonable because the backpack had been abandoned?

Section 8 of the Charter reads: Everyone has the right to be secure against unreasonable search or seizure.
 
It is well-recognized that s. 8 protects against unreasonable intrusions by the state into the privacy interests of an accused, but it extends only to expectations of privacy that are objectively reasonable in the totality of the circumstances: R. v. Reeves, 2018 SCC 56 at para. 110. Whether the search of the backpack was reasonable is reviewable on a standard of correctness as it raises a question of law: Housen v. Nikolaisen, 2002 SCC 33 at para. 8 
 
The evidence with respect to the retrieval and search of the backpack comes from Cst. Houlgate. He observed that one of the individuals — now known to be Mr. Wilkinson — was wearing a backpack. After the pursuit began, Mr. Wilkinson tripped and fell over a fence and kept running. He tripped and fell again. At some point, he no longer had the backpack. Mr. Wilkinson did not testify. The question is whether the backpack was abandoned, depriving Mr. Wilkinson of a privacy interest in the backpack, or whether he retained that privacy interest.
 
The trial judge, in brief reasons, concluded that Mr. Wilkinson abandoned the backpack thereby losing any privacy interest in the backpack. He concluded that there was no breach of s. 8 of the Charter when Cst. Houlgate searched the backpack. The judge expanded his reasons when addressing the application to exclude the evidence under s. 24(2), flowing from his conclusion that Mr. Wilkinson was arbitrarily detained. He drew an analogy with the “so-called garbage cases”, citing Patrick. He also considered Edwards and determined that Mr. Wilkinson did not have standing to challenge the search based on the finding that he had abandoned any privacy interest in it when he ran away from the backpack.
 
Mr. Wilkinson argues that the judge erred by factually finding that he had “thrown” the backpack away when there was no such evidence. A close review of the reasons for judgment does not reveal that the trial judge made that finding. The trial judge instead accepted that Mr. Wilkinson no longer had the backpack when he was detained and that it had been dropped in that area. The trial judge ultimately concluded the backpack was abandoned; and at no time did he suggest that Mr. Wilkinson had “thrown” it away. 
 
Mr. Wilkinson relies on R. v. Law, 2002 SCC 10 to support his position that his reasonable expectation of privacy was not relinquished just because the police recovered the lost property. In Law, the police recovered a stolen safe open in a field. The Court held:
 
Courts have, to be sure, recognized situations where it is unreasonable to expect personal property or information to remain private. It has been held that an individual can effectively abandon his own property by relinquishing any privacy interest in it: see Stillman, supra. It has also been implied that where the police recover property that has been cast off or stolen, they may infer it has been “abandoned” for the purposes of their investigation: R. v. LeBlanc (1981), 1981 CanLII 3213 (NB CA), 64 C.C.C. (2d) 31 (N.B.C.A.), cited in Dyment, supra, at p. 435; see also, United States v. Procopio, 88 F.3d 21 (1st Cir. 1996). Without more, however, the mere fact that the police recover lost or stolen property is insufficient to support an inference that the owner voluntarily relinquished his expectation of privacy in the item. The question remains: on the facts of the case, did the owner have a reasonable expectation of privacy in the item, or had he relinquished it? [Emphasis added.]
 
However, in this case, the backpack was neither lost nor stolen. The judge inferred that Mr. Wilkinson “released” the backpack in a private lot over which he had no control. 
 
Mr. Wilkinson submits that this Court’s decision in Reddy is applicable to this case. In Reddy, the majority concluded that Mr. Reddy was arbitrarily detained and that removing his jacket, leaving it in his car, and fleeing from police did not deprive him of his privacy interest in the jacket. In this case, Mr. Wilkinson was fleeing, and along the way discarded the backpack he was wearing. Unlike Mr. Reddy, dropping the backpack did not occur during an unlawful detention, but it occurred during the pursuit. 
 
Whether something is abandoned is a question of fact. In Patrick, the Supreme Court of Canada, in considering whether the disposal of garbage resulted in a loss of a privacy interest said the following at para. 25: 
 
Abandonment is therefore an issue of fact. The question is whether the claimant to s. 8 protection has acted in relation to the subject matter of his privacy claim in such a manner as to lead a reasonable and independent observer to conclude that his continued assertion of a privacy interest is unreasonable in the totality of the circumstances.
 
In this case, Mr. Wilkinson was running away from the officers who had identified themselves as police. When he started running, he was wearing a backpack. During the flight he fell on at least two occasions. He “released” the backpack when he fell the first time and kept running. Mr. Wilkinson did not testify. The judge drew the inference that he abandoned the backpack, and therefore lost any expectation of privacy in the backpack. I see no basis to interfere with that conclusion.
 
Cst. Houlgate testified that he searched the backpack as abandoned property. He was correct in that assessment. The search of the backpack was not conducted incidental to the investigative detention. It was searched on the basis that it was abandoned. 

Did the trial judge err in his findings with respect to the alleged breaches of the right to counsel?
 
Section 10 of the Charter requires the following: 

10. Everyone has the right on arrest or detention 
(a) to be informed promptly of the reasons therefor; 
(b) to retain and instruct counsel without delay and to be informed of that right; …
 
The officers handcuffed Mr. Wilkinson on detention. Cst. Houlgate left to look for the backpack and shoes. Cpl. March stayed with Mr. Wilkinson and asked him why he was running. He replied because he thought he was going to be shot. He was not advised of either the reasons for his detention or his right to counsel until Cst. Houlgate returned with the backpack. Cpl. March gave the evidence regarding the statement in direct examination; however, the Crown stopped him and said they were not tendering Mr. Wilkinson’s statement about the reason he fled. The defence elicited the statement in cross-examination. The parties agreed, and the judge accepted, that the evidence was not admissible. Despite that agreement, as noted above, the judge still considered the statement to the advantage of Mr. Wilkinson in his Voir Dire Ruling at para. 20. He considered it as an alternate or innocent explanation for running.
 
Mr. Wilkinson submits that the judge made a palpable and overriding error of fact when assessing the circumstances in relation to the provision of the s. 10 rights to Mr. Wilkinson where he said (quoting from the appellant’s factum), “… Mr. Wilkinson was given his s. 10(a) and (b) warnings a short time after he was detained on the ground. The only event that occurred after that [after detention – emphasis added by appellant] was Constable Colgate [sic] retracing the short distance back to the first fence…Constable Colgate [sic] retrieved the backpack [emphasis added by appellant] and then returned to Mr. Wilkinson…”. Mr. Wilkinson says that the other thing that happened was critical — Cst. Houlgate searched the backpack before the s. 10 rights were given, and that the judge overlooked that evidence.
 
The judge said the following about the provision of the right to counsel at paras. 8 and 39 of the Voir Dire Ruling:
 
While returning with the backpack, Constable Colgate [sic] searched it and he observed packages which he believed contained drugs. There was also cash, an unusual charging cord for a cellphone, an envelope, and a tag for a Mercedes‑Benz. He believed there were grounds to arrest the male, and proceeded to do so when he returned to Corporal March and the male. Another police officer arrived and conducted a search of Mr. Wilkinson. …
 
The evidence is also that Mr. Wilkinson was given his s. 10(a) and 10(b) warnings a short time after he was detained on the ground. The only event that occurred after that was Constable Colgate [sic] retracing the short distance back to the first fence where Mr. Wilkinson had tripped the first time. Constable Colgate [sic] retrieved the backpack and shoes and then returned to Mr. Wilkinson and Corporal March. Constable Colgate [sic] had opened and inspected the backpack while walking back.
 
In the Ruling on s. 24(2) at para. 4, the trial judge accepted these facts:
 
One peace officer went back and retrieved the backpack and two shoes. The other peace officer asked the male for his name, and he identified himself as Mr. Wilkinson. The police officer also asked Mr. Wilkinson why he ran. To this he said he was afraid of being shot because it had happened before. Charter warnings were given. The other police officer returned with the backpack and shoes.
 
The evidence was that Mr. Wilkinson was arrested and his ss. 10(a) and (b) rights were provided by Cst. Houlgate when he returned after looking in the backpack. While the judge’s reasons are not crystal clear with respect to the events, in my view, reading the reasons as a whole, the judge did not mistake the facts. He was aware that the arrest and provision of Charter rights were given by Cst. Houlgate after he had inspected the backpack.
 
The trial judge concluded that everything occurred very quickly. About six minutes elapsed from the beginning of the chase to the time Mr. Wilkinson was read his rights. The trial judge concluded that Mr. Wilkinson was advised of his rights within two to six minutes of his detention, which was in his assessment promptly and without delay.
 
This Court has found that “immediate” does not mean “instantaneous” given that sometimes practical considerations play a role in what is considered immediate for the purposes of s. 10(b): R. v. Fan, 2017 BCCA 99 at para. 53. Here, Mr. Wilkinson struggled and resisted detention, so he was handcuffed. The officers did not know where the other person was. Cst. Houlgate left to find the backpack. Cpl. March was out of breath from running after Mr. Wilkinson. 
 
In my view, while Mr. Wilkinson’s rights were provided promptly after the police found the contents of the backpack, Cpl. March did not refrain from questioning Mr. Wilkinson pending the notification of his s. 10 rights. The statement obtained by Cpl. March regarding his reason for running was not and could not have been tendered by the Crown as it was obtained prior to compliance with the Charter. However, there is no nexus between the search of the backpack and the statement provided by Mr. Wilkinson. Cpl. March should not have elicited a statement from Mr. Wilkinson until there was compliance with s. 10. However, no impugned evidence flowed from that conduct. To the contrary, the Crown expressly indicated that they would not be seeking to tender the statement that was obtained prior to Mr. Wilkinson being read his rights.
 
In my view, although for slightly different reasons than the trial judge, the officers complied with s. 10 of the Charter.

Conclusion
 
There is no need to consider s. 24(2) given my conclusion that the trial judge erred in finding that Mr. Wilkinson’s detention was not arbitrary and there were no other Charter breaches that affected the search of the backpack.
 
 I would dismiss the appeal.


./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/ca/2023bcca13.html
 
Following a trial, Justice Davies of the Supreme Court of British Columbia found P.R.J. guilty of having committed three offences against her daughter P., namely, sexual interference (Count 1), invitation to sexual touching (Count 2), and sexual assault (Count 3). In doing so, he rejected P.R.J.’s evidence denying that the single incident that formed the subject matter of the charges had occurred. By reason of the rule against multiple convictions set out in Kienapple v. The Queen, 1974 CanLII 14 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 729, the trial judge conditionally stayed the sexual assault charge and entered convictions on the two other charges. P.R.J. appeals only the conviction on the invitation to sexual touching charge. That conviction was based on a finding that P.R.J. “placed” P.’s hand on her, i.e., P.R.J.’s, vagina.
 
P.J.R. advances several arguments. First, she says a new trial is warranted because the judge misapprehended the evidence when he stated P. had disclosed in a recorded interview with a police officer that P.R.J. had “placed” (or “put”) P.’s hand on her vagina. That misapprehension is accepted by the Crown. P.R.J.’s position is that this error could have affected the judge’s decision to accept P.’s evidence as to what occurred. P.J.R. further says the finding that she “placed” P.’s hand on her vagina is not supportable in light of the fact that P. did not describe any particular physical act by P.R.J.
 
Next, P.R.J. contends that if the judge’s factual finding with respect to her having “placed” P.’s hand on her vagina is supportable, then, as a matter of law, such conduct does not satisfy the elements of the offence of invitation to sexual touching. In this regard, P.R.J. seeks an acquittal.
 
Last, P.R.J. contends that if the finding that she committed the offence of invitation to sexual touching is sustained, then that conviction should be conditionally stayed by reason of the rule against multiple convictions.
 
For the reasons that follow, I would allow this appeal to the limited extent of entering a conditional stay on the invitation to sexual touching charge. As discussed below, I have concluded that: 

(i) the misapprehension of the evidence was not material; 
(ii) it was open to the judge to find that P.R.J. “placed” P.’s hand on her vagina; 
(iii) the placing of P.’s hand satisfied the elements of invitation to sexual touching; 
(iv) the rule against multiple convictions applies to the charges of sexual interference and invitation to sexual touching; and 
(v) the sexual interference charge best describes P.R.J.’s conduct. 

Factual Background

What follows is intended as general background. 

Aspects of the proceedings and the evidence are discussed later, in greater detail, in relation to specific grounds of appeal. 

Evidence at Trial
 
In November of 2018, P.R.J. entered into a rehabilitation program to address a longstanding substance abuse issue. At that time, P., who was then eight years old, was placed in the care of P.R.J.’s sister, M.F.

In December of 2018, P. told M.F. that P.R.J. had sexually touched her. As a result of that disclosure, in mid-January of 2019, P. was interviewed twice by a member of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Child Exploitation Unit with specialized training and expertise in interviewing children. Those interviews were video and audio recorded.
 
The initial interview lasted approximately two-and one-half hours. During that interview, P. told the officer that one night when she was seven or eight years old, she crawled into P.R.J.’s bed; both were naked. P. said that P.R.J., who had been drinking, digitally penetrated P.’s vagina.
 
Following this interview, while M.F. and P. were having lunch, P. told M.F. she had forgotten to tell the officer something important, namely that P.R.J. had kissed her vagina. This resulted in P. being interviewed again that afternoon for approximately 20 minutes. P. told the officer about the kissing incident.
 
P. was nearly eleven years old at the time of trial. She was permitted to testify from outside the courtroom by means of closed-circuit television: see Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, s. 486.2.
 
At the outset of the trial, the Crown sought to have P.’s recorded interviews admitted into evidence under s. 715.1 of the Criminal Code. 
The trial judge held a voir dire to determine that issue. The Crown called two police officers and P. In her evidence-in-chief, P. adopted the contents of the interviews. During cross-examination, she testified P.R.J. made her touch (and digitally penetrate) P.R.J.’s vagina.
 
P.R.J. did not call any evidence on the voir dire or oppose the admission of P.’s interviews. The judge ruled P.’s interviews admissible and, with the consent of the parties, the evidence called on the voir dire became evidence on the trial proper.
 
M.F. was the Crown’s final witness.
 
P.R.J. testified. She denied the incident P. described ever happened. 

Closing Submissions
 
The overall position taken by P.R.J.’s counsel (who is not counsel on this appeal) was that the Crown had failed to prove P.R.J.’s guilt on any charge beyond a reasonable doubt. He submitted P. could well be mistaken about the evidence she gave and that P.R.J.’s evidence was more reasonable. He pointed to what he submitted were several inconsistencies in P.’s evidence and noted the lack of any corroborative physical evidence. No specific submissions were made with respect to the invitation to sexual touching charge.
 
Crown counsel’s overall position was that P.R.J.’s evidence should be rejected and that the evidence given by P. should be accepted because she was both credible and reliable. Passing reference was made to the cross-examination in which P. stated P.R.J. had made P. touch P.R.J.’s vagina. Trial Judge’s Reasons (2021 BCSC 2420)
 
The trial judge instructed himself on the burden and standard of proof before setting out the elements of the offences. He then reviewed the law concerning the approach to be taken in assessing the evidence of young children.
 
Applying the principles in R. v. W. (D.), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 742, the judge did not believe P.R.J. or find that her evidence raised a reasonable doubt. He provided several reasons for those conclusions.
 
In accepting P.’s evidence, the judge stated:

After considering the totality of P.’s evidence both in the taped interviews and her testimony at trial, while bearing in mind, also, her young age both at the time of the incident in issue and at the time of the interview as well as at trial, I have concluded that the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused committed each of the offences charged.

I find that P. was an honest witness who at trial did her best to recall events when she was much younger. 

When she could not do so, she admitted she could not recall. Most significantly, however, P. was steadfast in her testimony at trial in direct and cross-examination about what she said her mother had done to her that night in both touching and kissing her vagina and in placing her hand on her mother’s own vagina.

In concluding that I can rely safely upon P.’s testimony notwithstanding the accused’s denials, I specifically refer to and rely upon the following: 

1) In the two interviews conducted by Constable St. Thomas after she left her mother’s care, P. was responding to open-ended questions that were not suggestive and did not contaminate or otherwise negatively impact the truthfulness of her answers. 
2) P. was demonstrably uncomfortable and reluctant in discussing the subject of the sexual charges which she disclosed. 
3) P. demonstrated age-appropriate understanding of body parts and their function. 
4) P. was compellingly detailed both in contemporaneous drawings used to describe what her mother had done and in her simple descriptions of those acts including the smell of her mother’s fingers which she said "smelled like nothing else." 
5) P.’s impromptu use of the Kleenex box to describe her mother’s use of her fingers and mouth to go inside her vagina which described superficial as opposed to deep penetration. 
6) P.’s comparison of the touching of her vagina by her mother with the “tap tap tap” of using toilet paper herself. 
7) P.’s description of the differences between her mother’s behaviour when “normal” the day after the incident as opposed to her belief that the night before when she said, "I think she was drinking and have pills and stuff." 
8) P.’s evidence that, although she could not smell alcohol that night, she knew her mother was drinking that night because she had never done that before. 
9) P. seeking to excuse her mother’s behaviour by associating it with alcohol and pills not only convinces me of the truthfulness of her evidence about that night, but also the remainder of her evidence and her reluctance to testify about the matters her mother had done.

The totality of the evidence including that of P. herself also convinces me that she was not influenced by either her aunt or her grandmother in respect of the disclosures to her aunt that gave rise to these charges or as to the statements she made in interviews to Constable St. Thomas and her testimony at trial.
 
The Crown having accepted the Kienapple principle precluded convictions being registered on both the sexual interference and sexual assault charges, the judge, as requested by the Crown, entered a conditional stay on the latter charge. As a result, P.R.J. was convicted of sexual interference and invitation to sexual touching. 

The Grounds of Appeal Misapprehension of the Evidence The Alleged Errors
 
P.R.J. contends the trial judge twice misapprehended the evidence with respect to P. touching P.R.J.’s vagina.
 
With respect to the first alleged error, there is no dispute that the judge erred in stating that P. disclosed during her second interview that P.R.J. had “placed” or “put” P.’s hand on P.R.J.’s vagina. This error appears in the following paragraphs of the judge’s reasons under the heading “Evidence of P.”:
 
In that second interview, P. provided information that she had not provided earlier concerning the accused having touched P.’s vagina and about the accused placing P.’s hand on her own vagina.
 
As to the specificity of that sexual touching and kissing of her vagina and her mother’s actions in putting P.’s hand on the accused’s vagina, I refer to the transcript of P.’s second interview by Constable St. Thomas which I have again edited to remove irrelevant distractions and inaudible responses. However, in the excepts reproduced in the reasons, P. does not say anything about her hand being placed or put on P.R.J.’s vagina. Indeed, it is not something she mentioned in either interview. 
 
In her evidence-in-chief, P. did not say anything about touching P.R.J.’s vagina. However, that subject was raised by P.R.J.’s counsel during P.’s cross-examination: 

Q Okay. So, is this what you told your auntie? I'm just going to ask you this and you tell me if this is what you told your auntie. You told her that [P.R.J.] made – [P.R.J.], your mom, made you stick your fingers into her own vagina and smell that. So, did that happen? 
A Yes. 

Q You also said to your aunt according to your auntie that [P.R.J.] wanted [you] to touch [P.R.J.’s] vagina area and then smell her fingers. Do you remember – 
A She [indiscernible/CCTV]. 

Q And you told your auntie that? 
A Yeah. 

Q  But you didn’t mention that in the videotapes that we just saw; right? 
A I don’t think I did. I don’t know. 

Q So, are you really sure that that happened or were you wrong about that? 
A I don’t know if I told her, but that did happen. …

Q Did you ever -- did your mom ever tell you to put your hand in her private parts? 
A Like, that night? 

Q Or any other time. 
A Just one night she did. That night when she touched [indiscernible] just that night. 

Q Okay. But did she make you touch her in the same place? 
A Yeah. 

Q She did? 
A She wanted me [indiscernible] wanted me to. [Emphasis added.]
 
I have emphasized the word “her” above, because P.R.J. takes the position “her” refers to M.F. and, therefore, P. was not sure she told M.F. she had been made to touch P.R.J.’s vagina. She suggests this demonstrates that P. did not disclose this particular touching prior to trial. However, I do not agree with this interpretation of what P. said. P. was interviewed by a female officer and, having regard to the question about the videotapes, it is evident P. was referring to that officer. 

M.F. was not specifically examined with respect to whether P. had told her about touching P.R.J.’s vagina. However, in her evidence in chief in regard to when P. first disclosed what had occurred, M.F. stated: And then [P.] says, “Well, you know, I know she drinks, so I know she doesn’t mean to do this, but this is what she did one time”, and she proceeded to tell me what she did, touching back and forth, and I was taken aback by it.
 
The second error alleged by P.R.J. is that the judge was mistaken as to the substance of P.’s evidence when he found P.R.J. had “placed” or “put” P.’s hand on P.R.J.’s vagina. In this regard, P.R.J. points to the fact that in cross-examination, P. stated only that P.R.J. “made” or “wanted” P. to touch P.R.J.’s vagina. The Crown’s position is that the judge drew a reasonable inference from P.’s evidence. In the alternative, the Crown say that if the judge erred, then the error was not material. 

Analysis
 
The burden on an appellant who asserts a trial judge misapprehended evidence is a stringent one. The principles to be applied are set out in R. v. Osinde, 2021 BCCA 124, wherein I stated:
 
A misapprehension of evidence will warrant appellate intervention where the trial judge makes mistakes “as to the substance of material parts of the evidence and those errors play an essential part in the reasoning process resulting in a conviction”: R. v. Morrissey (1995), 1995 CanLII 3498 (ON CA), 97 C.C.C. (3d) 193 at 221 (Ont. C.A.); R. v. Lohrer, 2004 SCC 80 at para. 1, 3 S.C.R. 732. A misapprehension of the evidence “may refer to a failure to consider evidence relevant to a material issue, a mistake as to the substance of the evidence, or a failure to give proper effect to the evidence”: Morrissey at 218.
 
Where there is a material misapprehension of evidence that played an essential role in the reasoning process underlying a conviction, the appellant will not have received a fair trial and a miscarriage of justice will have occurred: Morrissey at 221; Lohrer at para. 1. One way to assess whether there has been a miscarriage of justice is to ask whether striking the error would leave the trial judge’s reasoning that led to conviction on unsteady ground: R. v. Sinclair, 2011 SCC 40 at para. 56, 3 S.C.R. 3.
 
Although a trial judge is uniquely positioned to make credibility assessments, where those assessments are based on misapprehensions of evidence and played a critical role in reaching a conviction, the assessments and the verdict will be insupportable: R. v. C.L.Y., 2008 SCC 2 at para. 21, 1 S.C.R. 5. This is so even when the evidence adduced at the trial was capable of supporting a conviction: Lohrer at para. 1.
 
Demonstrating a misapprehension is a high standard for an appellant. They must point to a plainly identifiable error, not merely suggest that the judge may have erred: “[t]he plain language or the thrust of the reasons must disclose an actual mistake”: Sinclair at para. 53. Additionally, as noted, the error must be material. And, in deciding whether a material misapprehension resulted in a miscarriage of justice, an appellate court may ask itself whether the misapprehension, once removed, could plausibly have left the judge with a reasonable doubt: Sinclair at paras. 56–57, 59, 61–62. If so, then the reasoning that led to a conviction is based on “unsteady ground”: Sinclair at para. 56. If not, then the misapprehension was likely not central to the judge’s reasoning process.
 
With regard to the first alleged error, the issue is not whether the trial judge misapprehended the evidence but whether the misapprehension that occurred played a critical role in his acceptance of one aspect of P.’s evidence. P.R.J. argues that the fact P. did not disclose being made or directed to touch P.R.J.’s vagina when interviewed was material and relevant to the assessment of her credibility and reliability in regard to her in-court testimony in regard to that touching. She says P.’s failure to mention that touching when interviewed constitutes a “difference” between her recorded statement and in-court testimony that the judge was required to consider. This point was not raised at trial. Indeed, defence counsel characterized the differences in the versions of events given by P. at different times as “slight”. It is apparent from defence counsel’s questions that he was in possession of a statement by M.F. in which M.F. stated P. had disclosed having been made to touch P.R.J.’s vagina.
 
In my view, P.R.J. has not met the high bar of showing that the judge’s error materially affected his reasoning process in assessing the reliability or credibility of P.’s testimony regarding touching P.R.J.’s vagina. The error was a matter of detail, not substance, given P. had disclosed that touching to M.F. prior to being interviewed. This is not a case in which a judge mistakenly believed a complaint had previously disclosed an aspect of their in-court version of events when no such disclosure had ever been made.
 
The second alleged misapprehension concerns the judge’s finding that P.R.J. “placed” or “put” P.’s hand on her vagina. P.R.J. says this was an error because P. only said P.R.J. “made” or “wanted” her to touch P.R.J.’s vagina. P.R.J. submits that based on P.’s testimony it is impossible to determine whether she physically took P.’s hand or used some form of verbal or non-verbal cue to communicate her desire to have P. touch her vagina.
 
I would not give effect to this argument. P.’s evidence was that P.R.J. had “made” / “wanted” her to touch P.R.J.’s vagina in the same way P.R.J. had touched P.’s vagina, i.e., by digital penetration. Given P.’s age and the fact that she had not been a willing participant in what occurred on the night in question, it was open to the judge to infer P.R.J. had drawn P.’s hand to her vagina to make that penetration happen. P.R.J.’s complaint is no more than a disagreement with the judge’s interpretation of the evidence; it does not rise to the level of a misapprehension of evidence: R. v. Swales, 2014 BCCA 350 at para. 49, 360 B.C.A.C. 291. 

Do the Facts Found by the Trial Judge Constitute the Offence of Invitation to Sexual Touching?

The Alleged Error
 
The invitation to sexual touching count on the indictment was worded as follows: [P.R.J.] from the 10th day of July, 2017 to the 10th day of November, 2018, inclusive, at or near [place omitted] in the Province of British Columbia, did, for a sexual purpose, invite, counsel or incite [P.], a person under the age of sixteen years, to touch, directly or indirectly, with a part of her body, or with an object, the body of [P.J.R.], contrary to Section 152 of the Criminal Code.
 
P.R.J. submits the conduct the trial judge found her to have engaged in does not satisfy the elements of an offence under s. 152 of the Criminal Code. She says that based on those findings that charge should now be dismissed. Whether the facts found by a trial judge satisfy the elements of an offence is a question of law subject to the correctness standard of review: R. v. Mara, 1997 CanLII 363 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 630 at para. 29; R. v. Greyeyes, 1997 CanLII 313 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 825 at para. 40.
 
This ground was advanced by P.R.J. on the basis that the trial judge, in para. 133 of his reasons, found only that she had engaged in the physical act of placing P.’s hand on her vagina and that the judge cannot be taken to have accepted P.’s testimony that she also told P. to do so. The Crown’s position is that para. 133 should be read as a finding that P.R.J.’s actions included this verbal component which, in the Crown’s view, invited or incited P. to place her hand on P.R.J.’s vagina. It is unnecessary to resolve this issue because I have concluded P.R.J.’s conviction under s. 152 is supported by her physical actions. 

Analysis
 
P.R.J.’s argument focuses on ss. 151 and 152 of the Criminal Code. Those provisions read as follows: 

Sexual Interference s. 151

Every person, who, for a sexual purpose, touches, directly or indirectly, with a part of the body or with an object, any part of the body of a person under the age of 16 years 

(a) is guilty of an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than 14 years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of one year; or 
(b) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction and is liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than two years less a day and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of 90 days. 

Invitation to Sexual Touching s. 152

Every person who, for a sexual purpose, invites, counsels or incites a person under the age of 16 years to touch, directly or indirectly, with a part of the body or with an object, the body of any person, including the body of the person who so invites, counsels or incites and the body of the person under the age of 16 years, 

(a) is guilty of an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than 14 years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of one year; or 
(b) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction and is liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than two years less a day and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of 90 days. [Emphasis added.] Section 22(3) of the Criminal Code provides: For the purpose of this Act, “counsel” includes procure, solicit or incite.
 
P.J.R. submits her actions amount to only an act of sexual interference (s. 151) and not an invitation to sexual interference (s. 152). Her position is that while an invitation can be both verbal and non-verbal, once there is physical contact for a sexual purpose, s. 152 is inapplicable. She cites R. v. J.H., 2010 NSSC 218, 291 N.S.R. (2d) 92, as authority for that position.
 
J.H. was charged with two offences arising out of one incident. Count 1 alleged he did for a sexual purpose “invite” the complainant to touch his genital region (s. 152). Count 2 alleged he did for a sexual purpose directly touch the complainant with his hand (s. 151). The Crown proceeded summary before a Provincial Court judge. The complainant testified that while standing in front of her, J.H. grabbed her hand, put it down the front of his shorts, and made a squeezing motion with his legs. J.H. testified those events never happened. 

The trial judge had a reasonable doubt with respect to whether the incident the complaint described had occurred and dismissed both charges. In addition, she held that Count 1 could not be proven because there was no evidence of any manner or type of communication between J.H. and the complainant. The Crown unsuccessfully appealed the dismissal of both charges on a number of grounds, including that the trial judge erred in finding that the evidence of the complainant could not, in any event, establish the commission of an offence under s. 152. P.R.J. relies on the following passage from the reasons of Justice MacDonald, the summary conviction appeal judge:
 
R. v. Sears (1990), 1990 CanLII 10938 (MB CA), 58 C.C.C. (3d) 62, (Man.) C.A., is authority for the principle that the offence is made out when the invitation, counselling or inciting occurs, not when the touching occurs, if at all. The action of J.H. in grabbing the hand of J.M.T. and putting it down his spandex shorts would be part of the actus reus for an offence under s.151 of the Criminal Code.
 
A review of the transcript of the proceedings confirms to me the trial judge's conclusion there were no words of invitation or counselling, nor for that matter, any form of actions that would fall within the perview [sic] s. 152. Thus, her finding of a not guilty is confirmed and I would dismiss the appeal on Count #1. In light of R. v. R.V., 2021 SCC 10, 402 C.C.C. (3d) 295, I am unable to accept this narrow interpretation of s. 152.
 
R.V. was charged in a three-count indictment with sexual assault, sexual interference, and invitation to sexual touching of his partner’s daughter. Each charged covered a period of approximately eight years, from when the complainant was approximately seven years old until she was approximately 13 years old. A jury convicted R.V. on the sexual interference and invitation to sexual touching charges but acquitted on the sexual assault charge. As discussed below, the invitation to sexual touching charge was based entirely on evidence of physical contact between R.V. and the child.
 
R.V. appealed the convictions on the basis that the verdicts were inconsistent. The Crown cross-appealed. The Crown agreed the verdicts were inconsistent but argued that the inconsistency arose from an error in the jury instructions and not an inconsistency in the jury’s factual findings. A majority in the Court of Appeal for Ontario allowed R.V.’s appeal, set aside the convictions on the sexual interference and invitation to sexual touching charges, and entered acquittals on those charges. The Court also dismissed the Crown’s cross-appeal: R. v. R.V., 2019 ONCA 664, 147 O.R. (3d) 657.
 
 In the Supreme Court of Canada, a majority allowed an appeal by the Crown and restored the convictions for sexual interference and invitation to sexual touching. It found that R.V.’s acquittal on the sexual assault charge was based on a misdirection by the trial judge which left the jury with a mistaken impression that the “force” required for sexual assault was different from the element of “touching” required for sexual interference and invitation to sexual touching.
 
With respect to the relationship between the offences of sexual interference, invitation to sexual touching, and sexual assault, Justice Moldaver (for the majority) said this:
 
Sections 151, 152 and 271 of the Criminal Code use different terms to describe similar acts. Sexual interference under s. 151 requires proof of touching, and invitation to sexual touching under s. 152 requires proof that the accused counselled, invited or incited the complainant to touch. 

Sexual assault, for its part, is not defined under s. 271. Instead, sexual assault is a s. 265(1) assault made applicable to sexual circumstances by s. 265(2). A person commits a sexual assault by applying force intentionally to another person, directly or indirectly, in circumstances of a sexual nature (Criminal Code, s. 265(1)(a); R. v. Chase, 1987 CanLII 23 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 293, at p. 302; R. v. Ewanchuk, 1999 CanLII 711 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 330, at para. 24).
 
Importantly, in holding that the jury’s verdicts on the sexual interference and invitation to sexual touching charges were not affected by the misdirection in regard to sexual assault, Moldaver J. said:
 
Further, the legal error was isolated to the acquittal. The trial judge’s instructions on sexual interference and invitation to sexual touching were legally correct in that the jury was properly instructed on the essential elements of those offences and on the evidence. The error in the instruction on sexual assault did not colour the instructions on the remaining offences. I can thus conclude, to a high degree of certainty, that the error pertained solely to the sexual assault charge, not to the sexual interference or sexual invitation charges. …
 
Since I have found that the verdicts are not actually inconsistent, the convictions are not unreasonable on that basis. R.V. does not allege any other basis by which his convictions might be unreasonable, and for good reason: they are supportable on the evidence tendered at trial and consistent with the jury instructions on those two offences. Accordingly, R.V.’s appeal from his convictions should have been dismissed. [Emphasis added.]
 
The instructions the jury in R.V. were given that are relevant to P.R.J.’s appeal were summarized by Chief Justice Strathy (for the majority) in the Court of Appeal:
 
After explaining how to determine whether the force was applied in circumstances of a sexual nature, the trial judge reviewed the complainant’s evidence concerning the incidents, which she described as the complainant’s hand “touching” the appellant’s penis, the appellant’s hand “touching” her breast area and her vagina, the complainant’s pelvis “touching” the appellant’s pelvis, and the appellant’s hand “touching” the complainant’s head and pushing it down to his penis. …
 
The trial judge then turned to the instructions for the other two offences, first sexual interference and then invitation to sexual touching. Again, she described the elements of the offences and broke them down into specific questions. In the case of sexual interference, she explained that the Crown was required to prove beyond a reasonable doubt:

(i) the complainant was under 16 years old at the time; 
(ii) the appellant touched the complainant; and (iii) the touching was for a sexual purpose. She explained that “touching” involves intentional physical touching, whether direct or indirect, of any part of the complainant’s body and that “[f]orce is not required” for sexual touching. She did not review the evidence on this count because it was the same as the evidence on the sexual assault count.
 
The trial judge then reviewed the essential elements of invitation to sexual touching: 

(i) the complainant was under 16 years old at the time; 
(ii) the appellant invited the complainant to touch his body; and 
(iii) the touching he invited was for a sexual purpose. 

Again, she instructed the jury on the meaning of “touching”, including that “[f]orce is not required”. She then identified the complainant’s evidence pertaining to this count, including that the appellant had: pushed her hand down to his penis; grabbed her wrist and put her hand on his penis to masturbate him; pulled her on top of him to ride him; and pushed her head down to his penis. Each of these acts was also referred to in the trial judge’s instructions on sexual assault. [Emphasis added.]
 
It is readily apparent that Moldaver J. found R.V. to have been properly convicted of invitation to sexual touching for having engaged in physical contact with the complainant for the purpose of having her touch him for a sexual purpose.
 
I do not accept P.R.J.’s submission that R.V.’s conviction for invitation to sexual touching can be distinguished because his conduct included:

(i) laying underneath the complainant while he was unclothed and she was clothed, simulating intercourse and ejaculating on his stomach; and 
(ii) laying underneath her while he was clothed and she was unclothed, simulating intercourse: S.C.C. at para. 9; Ont. C.A. at para. 6. P.R.J. says those acts could have been the basis on which that conviction was upheld. 

There are two responses to that argument.

The first is that it ignores the fact that those actions involved R.V. engaging in physical contact with the complainant for a sexual purpose. Thus, R.V.’s conduct does not distinguish his actions from P.R.J.’s actions in the way P.R.J. claims it does. The second is that in para. 69 of his reasons, Moldaver J. held that the jury instructions on that charge had been correct with respect to both the law and the evidence. That evidence included R.V. using his hand to take the complainant’s hand and place it on his genitals, which is equivalent to what R.J.R. did with P.’s hand.
 
Mariona c. R., 2018 QCCA 1524, also involves facts equivalent to what P.R.J. did. In that case, Mr. Mariona took X’s hand to force her to touch his penis. At trial he was found to have committed both sexual assault (s. 271) and invitation to sexual touching (s. 152). In upholding those findings, the Court of Appeal said this: [translation]
 
The evidence shows that the Appellant took the Complainant’s hand in order to force her to touch his penis. To do this, he uses force due to the lack of consent of the victim. 
This gesture amounts to assault. Since it is posed for sexual purposes, the trial judge was right to find a sexual assault even if no gesture of a sexual nature was posed on the body of the victim. …
 
The Appellant entices X to touch him and took her hand to do so. The gesture constitutes an invitation even in the absence of verbal communication. The specific mens rea is also present since the intention was clearly to be touched for a sexual purpose. [Emphasis added.] See also: R. v. R.C.R.T., 2016 MBQB 2 at paras. 7, 43 (conviction), appeal dismissed 2018 MBCA 139, and 2017 MBQB 113 at para. 1 (sentence): accused found to have committed invitation to sexual touching based on his having put the complainant’s hand on his penis.
 
Last, sight should not be lost of the fact that although the offence created by s. 152 is commonly referred to “invitation to sexual touching”, the means by which that offence can be committed extends beyond actions that fall under the verb “invite”. In particular, by virtue of the definition of “counsel” in s. 22(3) of the Criminal Code, an offence under s. 152 is committed when someone “procure[s]” a person under the age of 16 to touch them for a sexual purpose. In this regard, it is of note that in discussing the meaning to be given to the words “procure, solicit, or incite” in s. 22(3), Justice Fish said this in R. v. Hamilton, 2005 SCC 47, 2 S.C.R. 432, a case that involved charges of counseling the commission of indictable offences that were never committed:
 
In their relevant senses, the Canadian Oxford Dictionary (2nd ed. 2004) defines “counsel” as “advise” or “recommend (a course of action)”; “procure” as “bring about”; “solicit” as “ask repeatedly or earnestly for or seek or invite”, or “make a request or petition to (a person)”; and “incite” as “urge”. “Procure” has been held judicially to include “instigate” and “persuade”: R. v. Gonzague (1983), 1983 CanLII 3541 (ON CA), 4 C.C.C. (3d) 505 (Ont. C.A.). [Emphasis added.] Black’s Law Dictionary, 11th ed. (St. Paul, Minn.: Thomson Reuters, 2019), contains the following definition of “procure”: 1.
 
To obtain (something), esp. by special effort of means. 2. To achieve or bring something about (a result). 3. To obtain a sexual partner for another, esp. an unlawful partner such as a minor or a prostitute.
 
Returning to the case at bar, when P.R.J. took P.’s hand and placed it on her vagina, she instigated/brought about/ procured P. to touch her for a sexual purpose, thereby committing an offence under s. 152. 

Does the Kienapple Principle Apply?
 
P.R.J. contends the rule against multiple convictions precludes convictions being recorded for both sexual interference and invitation to sexual touching when the finding of guilt on the latter charge is based entirely on a physical act of touching for a sexual purpose. This issue was not raised before the trial judge. Although the Crown did not concede this point, it did state during the hearing of this appeal that, if ever there were a case in which ss. 151 and 152 offences should be subject to the Kienapple principle, then this would be it. The Crown agrees that when P.R.J. took hold of P.’s hand she did so for a sexual purpose and that, by doing so, she committed both offences.
 
As discussed in R. v. Prince, 1986 CanLII 40 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 480, the Kienapple principle precludes multiple convictions for different offences when there is both a factual and legal nexus connecting them. In this case, the critical question is whether there is a sufficient legal nexus. More particularly, the question is whether, in a situation where the s. 152 offence is made out through an act of touching, it can be said that there is an “additional and distinguishing element” between the s. 151 and s. 152 offences that would refute a sufficient legal nexus: Prince at 498. As Justice Doherty stated in R. v. K. (R.) (2005), 2005 CanLII 21092 (ON CA), 198 C.C.C. (3d) 232 at para. 36 (Ont. C.A.), “[t]he sufficiency of the legal nexus between offences will depend on an interpretation of the statutory provisions that create the offences and the application of those statutory definitions to the circumstances of the case” [emphasis added].
 
Both s. 151 and s. 152 were enacted to protect children against sexual abuse and exploitation. Section 151 requires the offender to have touched, either directly or indirectly, the complainant for a sexual purpose. Section 152 requires the offender to have communicated with the complainant in an effort to have the complainant touch them or another person for a sexual purpose. That communication can be verbal or non-verbal and, as discussed above, non-verbal communication can involve the offender touching the complainant.
 
In the present case, the communication (i.e., essential element) underlying P.R.J.’s conviction under s. 152 involved her touching P.’s hand for a sexual purpose. That touching satisfied the essential element of the s. 151 offence of which P.R.J. was also convicted. In these circumstances, there are no additional or distinguishing elements between the two offences and there is, to use the language of Chief Justice Dickson in Prince, “sufficient correspondence between [the] elements [of the two offences] to sustain the Kienapple principle”: at 501. To conclude otherwise would mean that a case in which the Crown proved only that the offender took the complainant’s hand and placed it on their own genitals would result in the offender standing convicted under both s. 151 and s. 152, if the Crown chose to proceed on both charges. In my view, that result would run counter to the fact, recognized by the Chief Justice, that “Canadian courts have long been concerned to see that multiple convictions are not without good reason heaped on an accused in respect of a single criminal delict”: Prince at 489–490.

The Quebec Court of Appeal took a similar approach in Mariona. As previously discussed, Mr. Mariona was convicted at trial of both sexual assault and invitation to sexual touching based on a single incident in which he took X’s hand to force her to touch his penis. Although the Court of Appeal held that Mr. Mariona was factually guilty of both offences, it applied the Kienapple principle and granted a conditional stay on the sexual assault charge. After noting that the Kienapple principle had not been applied to charges of sexual assault and invitation to sexual touching in Casavant c. R., 2016 QCCA 1340—a decision I will come back to—the Court stated: [translation]
 
The factual situation is different here, however. Indeed, the two charges relate to a single event of very short duration. The facts of the two offenses are identical. The use of force to bring the complainant’s hand towards his genitals, which constitutes the assault justifying the conviction for assault, is the same act which is considered to be an incitement for the purposes of the second offence. The required mens rea is also similar, an intention to touch or touch for a sexual purpose without the consent of the victim.
 
In Casavant, Mr. Casavant was found guilty at trial on charges of sexual assault (s. 271) and invitation to sexual touching (s. 152). 

Those charges alleged the offences occurred over a three-month period. In a statement admitted into evidence under s. 715.1 of the Criminal Code, the complainant described several incidents during which Mr. Casavant touched her genitals, several during which he kissed her on the mouth using his tongue, and one during which he rubbed his foot between her legs. She also described an incident during which she touched his penis through his clothes.

At the sentencing stage, the judge entered a conditional stay on the sexual assault charge on the basis of the Kienapple principle and recorded a conviction only on the invitation to sexual touching charge.
 
In allowing Mr. Casavant’s conviction appeal and ordering a new trial, the Court of Appeal held that the trial judge had erred in several respects, the most significant being that he had dealt with the matter on the basis that Mr. Casavant had been charged with sexual interference (s. 151) rather than invitation to sexual touching (s. 152). 
In that regard, Justice St. Pierre stated, in part:
 
A review of the content of the judgment leads me to conclude that the judge dealt with the case as though the appellant had been charged with an indictable offence under section 151 Cr. C. (sexual interference), which was not the case, and failed to analyze the essential elements of the offence under section 152 Cr. C. Thus, the appellant seems to have been convicted of a crime with which he was not charged, and the reasons provided by the judge do not allow us to logically connect his verdict (under s. 152 Cr. C.) to a discernable, intelligible basis.
 
I have come to this conclusion considering that 

(1) the judge convicted the appellant of sexual touching, 
(2) he did not discuss the relationship between the complainant and the appellant, particularly the complainant's insistence and the appellant's repeated refusals, 
(3) he ordered a conditional stay of proceedings in regard to the charge under paragraph 271(1)(a) Cr. C., and 
(4) he dealt with “the events” as a whole, without nuance or distinction, despite the complainant’s retractions and clearly contradictory statements, and without taking into account, in this context, the mother’s testimony that the complainant had lied in the past, that she was jealous, and that she has an imaginary world.
 
Justice St. Pierre went on to state that the Kienapple principle cannot apply as between charges of sexual assault and invitation to sexual touching because they are distinct offences. In doing so, she referred to R. v. Rhynes, 2004 PESCTD 30, 186 C.C.C. (3d) 29, application for leave to appeal and appeal dismissed 2004 PESCAD 15, 239 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 89, and R. v. Legare, 2008 ABCA 138, 236 C.C.C. (3d) 380, appeal on other grounds dismissed 2009 SCC 56, 3 S.C.R. 551, as standing for the proposition that an offence under s. 152 can be committed only by communication and not by touching. However, Casavant, Rhynes, and Legare pre-date the Supreme Court of Canada’s decision in R.V. and in none of them was consideration given to the fact that physical contact can be a means of communication under s. 152. Other noteworthy aspects of these cases are that: 

(i) Mr. Rhynes was convicted on two charges that particularized that he had “incite[d]” the complainant to touch him for a sexual purpose, but those convictions were set aside because there was no evidence he had done anything positive to urge, persuade, or encourage the complainant to do so; and 
(ii) Mr. Legare had no physical interaction with the complainant, as the offence was alleged to have been committed through an online chat room, and the court there determined the issue to be one of whether the mens rea was made out.
 
The facts of the present case are comparable to those in R.C.R.T. As discussed in the reason for sentence in that case (2017 MBQB 113), R.C.T.R. was found guilty of sexual assault, sexual interference, and invitation to sexual touching based on the fact that one night he touched his daughter all over her body, put her hand on his penis, put his mouth on her genitals, and put his penis in her vagina. At the outset of her reasons, Justice Greenberg dealt with the application of Kienapple principle. 

She held that conditional stays should be entered on the sexual assault and invitation to sexual touching charges. With respect to whether the invitation to sexual touching charge should be stayed in light of the conviction for sexual interference, she said this after referring to Prince and the need for there to be a legal nexus between the offences:
 
While invitation to sexual touching captures sexual conduct that may not be caught by sexual interference, both offences target the same wrong -- sexual acts with children. In my view, by enacting more than one offence, Parliament broadened the scope of conduct that is criminalized but did not intend to add extra punishment just because the conduct in question could result in convictions for both offences. Doherty J.A. explained the crux of the Kienapple principle in [R. v. K. (R.) (2005), 2005 CanLII 21092 (ON CA), 198 C.C.C. (3d) 232 (Ont. C.A.)]:

I think the three factors identified in Prince as severing any possible legal nexus between offences provide further support for the view that the crucial distinction for the purposes of the application of [the] Kienapple rule is between different wrongs and the same wrong committed in different ways. If the offences target different societal interests, different victims, or prohibit different consequences, it cannot be said that the distinctions between the offences amount to nothing more than a different way of committing the same wrong.
 
In the circumstances of this case, convictions for both sexual interference and invitation to sexual touching would offend the rule in Kienapple. 

As the same range of punishment applies to both offences, the choice of which conviction to maintain cannot be based on the fact that one charge is more serious. However, the charge of sexual interference more accurately describes the conduct in this case. So there will be a conditional stay on the charge of invitation to sexual touching. [Emphasis added.] See also: R. v. Hussein, 2017 ONSC 4202 at para. 45–47: during one incident the accused committed offences under ss. 151, 152, and 271; conviction recorded only in the s. 151 charge.
 
A parallel can be drawn between the present case and the application of the Kienapple principle in R. v. Seymour, 2014 BCCA 301, 359 B.C.A.C. 118. Mr. Seymour was convicted of attempting to break and enter into a business and of mischief to the entrance gate to that business. The facts were that he had used a grinder in an effort to open a gate in the fence around the business’s property. The mischief charge related to the damage done to the gate. In entering a conditional stay on the mischief charge, Justice Bennett said this, in part:
 
“Break” is defined in s. 321 of the Criminal Code as “to break any part, internal or external”. In this particular case, the act of trying to cut the lock amounts to both damaging the property and is the same act as “breaking” under s. 348. Normally, the offences would not attract the application of the rule against multiple convictions, as the element of “damage” is a separate and distinct element from those elements required to prove breaking and entering. However, on the facts of this case, the act of breaking caused the damage to the property, which is the gravamen of the offence of mischief. Therefore, the offences charged “do not describe different criminal wrongs, but instead describe different ways of committing the same criminal wrong” ([R. v. K. (R.)] at para 37). [Emphasis added.]
 
In the present case, P.R.J.’s taking of P.’s hand was both an act of sexual interference and the means by which she committed the offence of invitation to sexual touching. In these circumstances, those offences describe different ways of committing the same criminal wrong.
 
To sum up, in this case the trial judge found that on that night, P.R.J. sexually interfered with P., thereby committing the offence charged in Count 1 of the indictment. P.R.J. did so by digitally penetrating P.’s vagina, kissing P.’s vagina, and placing P.’s had on her vagina. While the taking of P.’s hand satisfied the element of the offence of invitation to sexual touching charged in Count 2, to paraphrase Dickson C.J. in Prince, to separately convict P.R.J. of that offence would be to heap multiple convictions on her in respect to a single criminal act without good reasons. What occurred that night was a single act of child abuse that should result in a single conviction. The offence of sexual interference best captures the totality of P.R.J.’s conduct. 

Disposition

I would allow this appeal to the limited extend of entering a conditional stay of proceedings on Count 2.


./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/ca/2023bcca50.html
 
SKOLROOD J.A.: On August 6, 2021, the appellant, Clinton Armstrong, was convicted of multiple counts arising out of two incidents involving his former common law spouse. With respect to the first incident, which occurred on December 28, 2019, Mr. Armstrong was convicted of one count of common assault, contrary to s. 266 of the Criminal Code.
 
With respect to the second incident, which occurred on February 10, 2020, after he and the complainant had separated, Mr. Armstrong was convicted of: 

a) aggravated assault, contrary to s. 268(2); 
b) assault with a weapon, contrary to s. 267(a); 
c) forcible confinement, contrary to s. 279(2); 
d) uttering threats, contrary to s. 264.1(1); 
e) breaking and entering for the purpose of committing an offence, contrary to s. 348(1)(b); 
f) mischief, contrary to s. 430(3); and 
g) two counts of failing to comply with conditions of an undertaking, contrary to s. 145(4)(a).
 
Mr. Armstrong was acquitted on a charge of attempted murder.
 
Mr. Armstrong was sentenced on November 15, 2021. On all of the counts other than the aggravated assault and the breaking and entering, the effective sentence was time served. For the aggravated assault, Mr. Armstrong was sentenced to seven years, which resulted in an effective sentence of four years, 128 days given time served. For the breaking and entering, Mr. Armstrong was sentenced to eight years, which resulted in an effective sentence of five years, 128 days with time served. The sentences were to run concurrently.
 
This Court has granted an extension of time, and Mr. Armstrong now seeks leave to appeal his sentence on the basis that the judge erred in principle, resulting in a global sentence that is unfit. Mr. Armstrong submits that a global sentence, before time served, should properly have been in the range of four to five years. 

Circumstances of the Offences
 
As noted, the incident giving rise to the first count occurred on December 28, 2019. At the time, Mr. Armstrong and the complainant had been living together in the complainant’s home but had agreed that they would separate. Mr. Armstrong was to move out on January 1, 2020. On the evening of December 28th, Mr. Armstrong and the complainant had an argument during which Mr. Armstrong slapped her face and pushed her on the chest. Police attended and arrested Mr. Armstrong. He was subsequently released.
 
The complainant remained unsettled by the incident and, on February 6, 2020, she provided a victim impact statement to Crown counsel. Four days later, on February 10, 2020, Mr. Armstrong returned to the complainant’s home, smashed a window, and broke into the home. He then attacked the complainant with a boxcutter‑type tool. The complainant managed to call 911 when she heard the sounds of her home being broken into and the line remained open throughout much of the attack. The judge described the attack and resulting injuries inflicted by Mr. Armstrong in these terms:
 
Mr. Armstrong backed [the complainant] up into the living room area and proceeded to slash her face, head, and torso repeatedly. She described her injuries at trial and they were documented by a forensic nurse examiner. Mr. Armstrong inflicted a very deep, 16‑centimetre gash from the level of her temple down through her left cheek, leaving a scar that is still apparent; and 11‑centimetre‑long wound from below her right ear lobe to her right jaw; and a five‑centimetre-long wound along her right cheek, as well as numerous other gashes, abrasions, and puncture wounds to her face and neck. As they struggled, Mr. Armstrong inflicted more superficial cuts across her chest, down and across her abdomen, and also on her back, across her right shoulder blade. All told, the forensic nurse documented more than a dozen injuries to [the complainant’s] face and head and a similar number to her torso. [The complainant] also sustained apparent defensive wounds to her arms and hands, including a deep cut across the tip of her right thumb that took five stitches.
 
Throughout the attack, Mr. Armstrong repeatedly stated that he intended to kill the complainant. At some point, the complainant attempted to escape but Mr. Armstrong caught her and told her, “Fight for your life”. The complainant then did manage to escape to a neighbour’s home. Mr. Armstrong followed her for a short distance then stopped and returned to the complainant’s home where he vandalized her car. He then went into the house and vandalized it as well, causing significant damage. He was finally subdued by the police. 

Circumstances of the Offender
 
Mr. Armstrong was 50 years old at the time of the offences. He has a steady work history. He and the complainant had been in a relationship for 13 years, in which there were no prior incidents of physical violence.
 
The judge described Mr. Armstrong as having a significant history of alcohol abuse and a lengthy period of opiate dependency, and noted that he had been convicted of impaired driving in 1990 and 1992. The judge also referred to previous engagements with the justice system, including a restraining order issued in 2004, involving a former partner, and an assault of another partner in 2005, for which he received a suspended sentence. Mr. Armstrong subsequently breached the terms of his probation order. The judge observed that Mr. Armstrong’s history illustrates “the risk he poses to intimate partners” (at para. 37).
 
The judge referred to psychometric testing of Mr. Armstrong conducted by Dr. Dugbartey, who suggested that Mr. Armstrong was “a man in need of anger management treatment” (at para. 39). Dr. Dugbartey also opined:
 
…Mr. Armstrong presents with high risk for violence in intimate partner relationships. This risk would remain elevated in the medium term and with particular focus upon [the complainant]. His intimate partner violence risk in general would be especially high when the object of his romantic intimate partner decides to end the relationship. In my formulation, control in intimate relationships is a significant area of problem for this man.
 
As part of his reasons for sentence, the judge noted that although Mr. Armstrong pled not guilty to all counts, at trial he only seriously contested the counts of attempted murder—of which he was acquitted—forcible confinement and the common assault of December 28, 2019. The judge noted that Mr. Armstrong professed to having no memory of the February 10, 2020 incident, that he said he was not a violent person, and that he professed to be extremely remorseful (at para. 17). 

Reasons for Sentence
 
Having reviewed the circumstances of the offence and of Mr. Armstrong, the judge observed that he risked “stating the obvious to say that his blameworthiness is at the high end of the scale” (at para. 43). The judge identified a number of aggravating circumstances, including (at para. 45): 

a) There was some degree of premeditation, as evidenced by the fact that Mr. Armstrong went to the complainant’s home armed with the boxcutter; 
b) The assault was committed while Mr. Armstrong was on undertakings that had been put in place for the complainant’s protection; 
c) The assault involved breaking and entering, violating the peace and security the complainant was entitled to in her home, and forcible confinement within her home; 
d) It was a very violent crime, with grievous injuries and psychological terrorization through the uttering of death threats; 
e) The complainant had been Mr. Armstrong’s intimate partner. The judge noted that this latter factor is a mandatory aggravating factor under s. 718.2(a)(ii) of the Criminal Code (at para. 46). 
 
The judge then observed that there was little that could be said for Mr. Armstrong in terms of mitigating factors. The judge acknowledged that Mr. Armstrong only seriously contested the counts of attempted murder, forcible confinement, and the common assault of December 28, 2019. He also acknowledged the defence submission that this should be considered as tantamount to a guilty plea on the other charges, but held that “[g]iven Mr. Armstrong’s lack of insight and failure to accept personal responsibility, this factor has only very slight weight” (at para. 48).

The judge discussed the parity principle, citing the decision of this Court in R. v. MacDonald, 2012 BCCA 155. He reviewed a number of authorities cited by both the Crown and the defence, including R. v. Biln, 1999 BCCA 369, where this Court referred to a sentence range for aggravated assault of two years less a day to six years, and R. v. Craig, 2005 BCCA 484, where this Court referred to a number of cases in which the low end of the range was said to be 16 months. He also noted a number of cases in which the sentence imposed was both lower and higher than that range. Based upon his review of the relevant cases, the judge set out a number of points that informed his sentence analysis (at para. 69): 

a) The upper end of the typical range of sentences for aggravated assault appears to have increased from six years to a usual upper end of seven years or more, subject to all of the caveats that go along with considering and applying sentencing ranges; 
b) Sentencing ranges in the cases have been global ranges, involving both cases of intimate partner violence as well as violence against strangers. The judge queried whether a distinct or higher range of sentencing should be articulated for cases involving intimate partner violence, given the inclusion of such violence as a specific aggravating factor in s. 718.2(a)(ii) of the Criminal Code; and 
c) Unless or until a distinct range is formulated for intimate partner violence cases, given the Code mandates such violence as an aggravating factor, premeditated intimate violence cases leading to serious personal injury may be appropriately situated at or towards the high end of the conventional range.
 
 Applying those principles, the judge imposed a sentence of seven years for the aggravated assault. With respect to the break and enter charge, the judge noted that had Mr. Armstrong’s criminal conduct upon breaking and entering the complainant’s home been limited to the aggravated assault, he would have imposed a similar seven‑year sentence. However, given the other offences committed, including the “wanton destruction” of the complainant’s property, he imposed an eight‑year sentence to run concurrently (at para. 72). 
 
On Appeal

Mr. Armstrong submits that the judge erred in principle in imposing a sentence of seven years for the aggravated assault count.
 
Specifically, Mr. Armstrong submits: 
a) the judge failed to consider relevant factors which led him to ignore the presence of mitigating circumstances; and 
b) the judge erred by imposing a disparate and disproportionate sentence on Mr. Armstrong. 

Standard of Review
 
The standard of review on a sentence appeal was succinctly stated by Justice Stromberg‑Stein in this Court’s recent decision in R. v. Garie, 2022 BCCA 382:
 
The basis for appellate intervention in sentencing is narrow: R. v. Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64; R. v. Friesen, 2020 SCC 9. An appellate court will only interfere with a sentence where there has been an error in principle impacting the sentence, or where the sentence is demonstrably unfit: Lacasse at paras. 41–4; Friesen at para. 26. An error in principle includes an error of law, a failure to consider a relevant factor, or an erroneous consideration of an aggravating or mitigating factor: Friesen at para. 26. A sentencing judge is entitled to significant deference in weighing and balancing factors relevant to crafting a fit sentence; appellate intervention is warranted only where a sentencing judge has exercised their discretion unreasonably, not merely because an appellate court would have weighed the factors differently: Lacasse at para. 9; R. v. Nasogaluak, 2010 SCC 6 at para. 46. 

Discussion 

(1) Did the judge err in principle by failing to consider relevant mitigating circumstances?
 
Mr. Armstrong submits that in stating that there was little that could be said in the way of mitigating factors, the judge failed to consider, or give adequate weight to, a number of factors including: 

a) the fact that he only contested three of the charges; 
b) as set out in a pre‑sentence report, he completed a number of rehabilitative programs and expressed a willingness to engage in additional counselling; 
c) he is remorseful, as noted in the pre‑sentence report and as he expressed personally in court; 
d) there was no history of violence in his relationship with the complainant; and 
e) he has a history of gainful employment.
 
In addition, Mr. Armstrong submits that the judge amplified his personal circumstances by referring to a history of alcohol and substance abuse and his previous engagements with the justice system involving former intimate partners. Mr. Armstrong makes the point that both issues arose years before the offences in issue; his conviction for impaired driving was over 30 years ago and his assault charge resulting in a suspended sentence was 18 years ago.
 
I am unable to accept Mr. Armstrong’s submission on this ground of appeal. The various factors noted by Mr. Armstrong were identified and considered by the judge. For example, the judge acknowledged that Mr. Armstrong only contested three of the charges, but he gave little weight to that factor given what he described as Mr. Armstrong’s lack of insight and failure to accept personal responsibility (at para. 48). That lack of insight similarly led the judge to place minimal weight on Mr. Armstrong’s professed remorse. 
 
Mr. Armstrong submits that this observation by the judge ignores the statement he made in court in which he said he was sorry, that he never meant to hurt the complainant, and that he had to take responsibility. Respectfully, I disagree. The judge heard what Mr. Armstrong had to say, but he was also alive to the fact that Mr. Armstrong continued to deny the December 28th assault, and that he professed to have no memory of the events of February 10, 2020. The judge also had before him the pre‑sentence report in which the author noted that Mr. Armstrong “was unable to provide any insight or accountability regarding the incident”. In the circumstances, I do not accept that the judge ignored Mr. Armstrong’s professed remorse and responsibility.
 
In terms of Mr. Armstrong’s criminal history, the judge was fully aware of when the events occurred, but found that that history was relevant to assessing the risk of Mr. Armstrong reoffending. The judge’s finding was supported by the psychological assessment that described Mr. Armstrong as presenting a “high risk for violence in intimate partner relationships”.
 
The judge was also aware of, and considered, Mr. Armstrong’s work history, as well as the absence of prior violence in the relationship. The judge noted that the absence of violence distinguished this case from other cases of intimate partner violence where there was a history of abuse, but it did not mitigate the seriousness of the offences here (at para. 35).
 
In my respectful view, the judge did what sentencing judges are required to do; he balanced all of the relevant circumstances, including mitigating and aggravating factors, in order to arrive at a fit and proper sentence. Mr. Armstrong is effectively asking this Court to engage in a process of reweighing those factors. That is not the role of this Court, and does not accord with the standard of deference owed to sentencing judges: see R. v. Padda, 2019 BCCA 351 at para. 24.
 
I would not accede to this ground of appeal. 

(2) Did the judge err in imposing a disparate and disproportionate sentence?
 
Mr. Armstrong submits that the judge misapplied the principle of parity. Specifically, Mr. Armstrong submits that the judge imposed a sentence on the aggravated assault count in excess of the sentences in many of the cases cited to the judge, several of which Mr. Armstrong says involved more egregious facts. Further, Mr. Armstrong submits that the judge erred when he suggested that the upper end of the sentence range for aggravated assault has increased from six to seven years. He cites R. v. Randhawa, 2019 BCCA 429, where this Court referred to the range of 16 months to six years.
 
Mr. Armstrong submits that there are no exceptional circumstances here that would justify a sentence outside of this range, and that given the numerous mitigating factors that he again says the judge ignored, an appropriate global sentence is in the range of four to five years, before credit for time served.
 
In my view, the judge did not misapply or ignore the principle of parity, nor did he otherwise err in imposing a sentence of seven years for the aggravated assault. It is well established that sentencing ranges are guidelines, not hard and fast rules, and that simply departing from a sentence range is not itself an error of principle: R. v. Friesen, 2020 SCC 9 at para. 37; R. v. Parranto, 2021 SCC 46 at paras. 36–37.
 
Further, there is no requirement for there to be exceptional circumstances in order to justify a sentence outside of an articulated range. The issue is whether the sentence is proportionate to the offence committed and the moral blameworthiness of the offender: R. v. Ellis, 2022 BCCA 278 at paras. 117–119; Parranto at para. 40.
 
As noted, the judge considered all of the relevant circumstances, including mitigating and aggravating factors, and concluded that the assault of the complainant was a “grave crime with a high degree of moral culpability” (at para. 70). The judge put particular weight on the fact that the assault occurred in the context of an intimate partner relationship and that Mr. Armstrong broke into the complainant’s home to commit the assault. As the Crown submits, similar home invasion type offences have resulted in sentences of 10 years or more: citing as examples, R. v. D.A.W., 2002 BCCA 336 at para. 32; R. v. Smith, 2020 BCCA 87 at paras. 32–36. Those cases lack the additional aggravating factor of intimate partner violence.
 
In these circumstances, I am unable to find that the sentence of seven years imposed for the aggravated assault is demonstrably unfit or that the judge erred in principle. With respect to the sentence for the break and enter, Mr. Armstrong submits that it was impacted by the sentence for the aggravated assault and that had the assault sentence been less, so too would the sentence for the break and enter. Given my finding that the sentence for aggravated assault was fit, there is no basis upon which to disturb the sentence for the break and enter.
 
In light of these findings, it is not necessary to decide on this appeal whether the top end of the effective range of sentence for aggravated assault has increased, or whether there should be a new sentence range or analytical framework for sentencing of violent assaults in an intimate partner context. 

Disposition
 
For the reasons stated, I would grant leave to appeal, but I would dismiss the appeal.
 
MACKENZIE J.A.: I agree.
 
WILLCOCK J.A.: I agree.
 
MACKENZIE J.A.: Leave to appeal is granted, but the appeal is dismissed.


./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/ca/2023bcca33.html

On September 27, 2018, the appellant was designated a dangerous offender under s. 753(1)(a) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, and was sentenced to an indeterminate sentence pursuant to Part XXIV of the Code.

He appeals the dangerous offender designation and sentence on the grounds that the sentencing judge erred in law by placing weight upon his failure to participate in an interview conducted as part of a court‑ordered assessment by Dr. Shabehram Lohrasbe, a psychiatrist, (described in a report dated May 4, 2017), and an assessment for Crown Counsel by Dr. Barry Cooper, a psychologist, (described in a report dated November 30, 2017).

The judge described the refusal to be interviewed as follows:
 
Other than the report and testimony of Dr. Riar, Mr. Clayton provided no evidence other than a brief statement made through his counsel. Also of significance in the evidence is the refusal of Mr. Clayton to be interviewed by the two expert witnesses qualified by the Crown, i.e. Dr. Lohrasbe and Dr. Cooper. [Emphasis added.]

He considered the lack of cooperation to be evidence of a mistrust of experts:
 
In evidence at this hearing were expert reports filed by the Crown and written by Dr. Lohrasbe and Dr. Cooper. Dr. Lohrasbe and Dr. Cooper also testified and were cross-examined by counsel for Mr. Clayton. Mr. Clayton declined to be interviewed by both Dr. Lohrasbe and Dr. Cooper which reflects the long-standing mistrust exhibited by Mr. Clayton towards authority and those who have attempted to work with him in attempting to understand his motivations, attitudes and most significantly, his likelihood of re-offending in a violent manner. As a result, the reports of these two psychiatrists were limited to extensive reviews of Mr. Clayton’s criminal records, the Correctional Records, prior psychological records, reasons for judgment, transcripts from trials and sentencing hearings and other documents previously listed in these reasons and included in Exhibit 1. [Emphasis added.]

He noted that the opinions of the experts with whom the appellant had not spoken were “qualified” by the accused’s refusal to participate:
 
The opinions of Dr. Cooper regarding the risk of Mr. Clayton re-offending in a violent manner, especially with women, and treatability are very similar to Dr. Lohrasbe’s opinions. Dr. Cooper testified at length, and also referenced in his report of November 30, 2017, the several assessment tools available to assist and support psychologists in evaluations of risks and treatability, all qualified to some degree by the refusal of Mr. Clayton to be interviewed for the assessment. Dr. Cooper has had extensive experience in the field of clinical and forensic psychology as a clinical instructor, a private clinical-forensic practitioner and contract psychologist with the CSC. [Emphasis added.]

Finally, after making the designation and when addressing the imposition of an appropriate penalty, the judge placed some weight upon the fact the appellant had declined to be interviewed by Drs. Lohrasbe and Cooper:

The imposition of an indefinite sentence of imprisonment in this case is proportionate to the circumstances of Mr. Clayton considering his offending history, the strong likelihood that he cannot or will not change his conduct in the future and the protection of society. 

In the case before the Court, Mr. Clayton clearly has a deep mistrust of those in authority as is evidenced by his conduct with correctional personnel and his refusal to even consent to being interviewed by psychiatrists and other professionals. [Emphasis added.]

It appears that the only evidence before the trial judge of the appellant refusing to being interviewed by a psychiatrist was his refusal to be interviewed by Dr. Lohrasbe.

The appellant, relying on R. v. Brown (1999), 70 C.R.R. (2d) 170, 1999 CanLII 15180 (B.C.S.C.), and R. v. Funk, 2014 BCSC 383, contends that it is an error to draw an adverse inference from an offender’s refusal to be interviewed and that the sentencing judge erred by relying on the appellant’s refusal to participate in the assessments to draw an adverse inference regarding his future treatability.

For reasons set out below, I am of the view the judge erred in placing weight upon the appellant’s failure to participate in interviews. However, the error was immaterial because uncontradicted evidence strongly supported the only conclusion affected by the error: that the appellant has a deep mistrust of persons in authority. 

The Evidence of Non‑Cooperation was Used Improperly 

The passages from paras. 58, 68 and 120 of the sentencing judge’s reasons that I have emphasized above show that the judge considered the appellant’s non‑cooperation with the examining experts for two purposes: 

a) First, appropriately, in order to ensure that the opinions of Dr. Lohrasbe and Dr. Cooper were sufficiently qualified (as reflected in para. 68). 
b) Second, and problematically, for the purpose of drawing a conclusion with respect to the appellant’s character (at paras. 58 and 120). The reference, in para. 120, in particular, to the appellant’s refusal to be interviewed by a psychiatrist must be a reference to the refusal to be interviewed for the s. 752.1 assessment by Dr. Lohrasbe. In my opinion, it was an error to place weight upon the appellant’s non‑cooperation with Dr. Lohrasbe. 
 
In Funk, Justice Davies wrote:

Although an order made under s. 752.1 remands the offender into the custody of the assessor or the assessor’s expert for the purpose of the completion of an assessment within a prescribed period of time, it does not require the offender to participate in the assessment and more specifically does not require the offender to be subjected to any interview process or testing.

Why that is so was explained by D. Smith J. (as she then was) in R. v. Brown (1999), 1999 CanLII 15180 (BC SC), 70 C.R.R. (2d) 170 (B.C.S.C.) at para. 34 as follows: 
 
The s. 7 residual right against self-incrimination, does not entirely disappear post-conviction. While an offender may be compelled to attend for an assessment, which necessarily involves some participation by the offender with the procedure employed by the assessor, an offender cannot be forced to communicate with the assessor if he chooses not to. In other words, while he may be compelled to attend the assessment, incriminating evidence cannot be conscripted from him if he chooses not to participate. The offender cannot be punished for not fully participating in the assessment, nor can the court make an adverse inference with respect to his or her refusal to participate: R. v. Small aka Pizzey (29 July 1998), Fort St. John 10243 (B.C.S.C.).
See also R. v. Kim, 2000 BCSC 1506 at para. 43.

There are circumstances in which some weight may properly be placed upon an accused’s refusal to speak to an examining physician. 

In R. v. Charlebois, the trial judge permitted the Crown to ask the accused in cross-examination whether he would submit to an examination by a Crown psychiatrist. A conviction appeal (reported at 135 C.C.C. (3d) 414, 1999 CanLII 13682 (Q.C. C.A.)) founded on the contention the jury charge was faulty, was dismissed because the defects in the charge were not material to the outcome and could be answered by the curative proviso. Fish J.A.(as he was), dissenting, would have allowed the appeal. He concluded that the errors in the charge were material but also found the judge had erred by permitting the Crown to ask the accused whether he would agree to participate in a psychiatric assessment. That error, in his view, could not be cured. He noted that the circumstances in which it is appropriate to introduce evidence of the accused’s refusal to speak to a Crown psychiatrist are limited: 
There is precedent, pre- and post-Charter, for the proposition that the Crown, in appropriate circumstances, can introduce evidence of the accused's refusal to speak to a Crown psychiatrist. [Sweeney (No. 2) (1977), 1977 CanLII 1334 (ON CA), 35 C.C.C. (2d) 245 (Ont. C.A.); Stevenson (1990), 1990 CanLII 2594 (ON CA), 58 C.C.C. (3d) 464 (Ont. C.A.); Worth (1995), 1995 CanLII 366 (ON CA), 98 C.C.C. (3d) 133 (Ont. C.A.)] This has generally been justified as a necessary exception to the accused’s right of silence in cases where the defence calls psychiatric evidence. If only the defence expert has had access to the accused – the very person whose mental state or condition is in issue – the weight of the Crown's evidence might otherwise be unfairly diminished by the fact that its experts have been denied a similar opportunity. [Emphasis added.]
 
 Because the Crown had not adduced psychiatric evidence Fish J.A. concluded the Sweeney exception was inapplicable: 
… Unlike Sweeney (No. 2), supra, and the other decisions I have mentioned, there was thus no risk in this case that the jury might depreciate the evidence of a Crown psychiatrist because he failed to examine the accused. The "Sweeney exception" therefore did not apply here.
 

The appeal as of right to the Supreme Court of Canada was dismissed at 2000 SCC 53. Justice Bastarache, for the majority, described the “Sweeney” exception:
 
… [A]llowing the evidence of the refusal is justified as a necessary exception to the accused’s right of silence where the defence has called psychiatric evidence. The exception recognizes that the weight of the Crown’s evidence might be unfairly diminished by the fact that its experts have been denied access to the accused when the ultimate issue in question is the accused’s mental state or condition. In Worth, the Ontario Court of Appeal found (at pp. 140-41): Having put his sanity in issue, we do not think the appellant could preclude the jury from drawing an adverse inference from his refusal to speak to the Crown psychiatrist. An accused’s right to silence is not absolute. It is protected in the terms of s. 7, that is, an accused cannot be deprived of his right to silence except in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice. Since the appellant put his sanity in issue and had the burden of proving his mental disorder, we do not think that the trial judge’s comments contravened the principles of fundamental justice. In R. v. Stevenson… Morden J.A. specifically approved Sweeney notwithstanding s. 7 of the Charter. He wrote at p. 495: I appreciate that the right to remain silent under s. 7 in all its manifestations does not necessarily have the identical content and scope of the common law right. In the context of a case such as this, however, I can think of no reason why the general approach in Sweeney should not be followed. In that case, Zuber J.A., for this court, noted at p. 251 that the rule relating to the right to remain silent was “not so rigid nor so pervasive that it admits no exceptions nor limit”. ...
 
In sum, the Crown had the right to counter the expert evidence used to support the accused’s theory that he killed in self-defence, and thus the Crown was entitled to ask the accused whether he would undergo an assessment. The trial judge did not err in law by instructing the jury that the refusal was relevant to the probative value of the defence expert’s evidence. Even if this were not the case, this is a situation where s. 686(1)(b)(iii) could be applied to rectify an error since there would have been little prejudice caused to the accused.
 
The exception to the right to silence is intended to preclude the accused from adducing evidence to which the Crown is unable to respond effectively. In R v. Madood, 2015 ABQB 611 at para. 106, the court held that the exception arises where the accused has called psychiatric evidence in his defence and Crown’s experts do not have the opportunity to do a complete assessment, noting: “In such cases, it is open to the Court to treat the defence expert opinion with skepticism”. 
 

Such an adverse inference was drawn in R. v. Aday, 2008 BCSC 397; R. v. G.C.Z., 2015 BCSC 1596; and R. v. So, 2021 BCSC 672. In So the court observed:
…The weight of the Crown’s evidence would be unfairly diminished if its experts have been denied access to the accused when the ultimate issue is the accused’s mental state. In fact, the refusal may be relevant to the probative value of the defence’s expert evidence. …
 
The line of authority reflected in Sweeney and Charlebois and followed in Aday, establishing an exception to the general rule, does not appear to have been referred to or considered in Funk or Brown.
 
The offender does not appear to have adduced any psychiatric evidence in his defence in Brown. The trial judge in that case cited the observation of Iacobucci J. in R. v.White (1999), 135 C.C.C. (3d) 257, 1999 CanLII 689 (S.C.C), at para. 45, that “[t]he residual protections provided by the principle against self‑incrimination as contained in s. 7 are specific, and contextually-sensitive”, as well as the following passage, which in my view is apt in the case at bar: ... The principle against self-incrimination demands different things at different times, with the task in every case being to determine exactly what the principle demands, if anything, within the particular context at issue.
 
In Funk, the accused had participated in an independent interview and sought to rely upon the opinion of his own expert, despite his non‑cooperation with the Crown’s expert. The court did not expressly consider whether, by doing so, he brought the case within the Sweeny exception. 
 
In R. v. Kim, 2000 BCSC 1506 Justice Dillon (at para. 43) cited R. v. Teskey (1996), 48 C.R. (4th) 267, 38 Alta L.R. (3d) 246, 1996 CanLII 10360 (Alta. Q.B.) for the proposition that the exception described in Sweeney is inapplicable where a dangerous offender refuses to submit to a psychiatric examination by a Crown‑nominated expert. 

In Tesky, Nash J. wrote:
 
Mr. Teskey refused to submit to examination by the psychiatrist nominated by the Crown. Counsel for the Crown urges upon the Court that an adverse inference should be drawn. In support, he cites the following cases:

1. R.v. Fitzgerald (1982), 1982 CanLII 1762 (ON CA), 70 C.C.C. (2d) 87 (Ont. C.A.); 
2. Chapelle v. R. (1980), 1980 CanLII 2871 (ON SC), 52 C.C.C. (2d) 32 (Ont. H.C.); 
3. R. v. Sweeney (1977), 1977 CanLII 1334 (ON CA), 35 C.C.C. (2d) 245 (Ont. C.A.); 
4. R. v. Worth (1995), 1995 CanLII 366 (ON CA), 98 C.C.C. (3d) 133 (Ont. C.A.).

In three of the cases, R. v. Fitzgerald, R. v. Sweeney and R. v. Worth, the accused was charged with murder and raised the defence of insanity. The accused refused to submit to psychiatric examination by a Crown psychiatrist. The accused however, in all of the cases, called psychiatrists to support the defence of insanity. The Ontario Court of Appeal in all three cases up-held as correct the Trial Judge's direction to the jury that although the accused was entitled to refuse to undergo psychiatric examination by the experts retained by the Crown, this was a fact from which it could be inferred that the defence of insanity was either contrived or so weak that it could not withstand scrutiny.

In my view, none of these cases support the Crown's assertion that on a dangerous offender hearing, the Judge may draw an inference adverse to the accused where the accused refuses to be examined by the psychiatrist nominated by the Crown. In the cases cited, the accused had raised the defence of insanity and placed his mental state in issue. [Emphasis added.]
 
It is true that on an application by the prosecutor under s. 752.1 of the Code, it is not the accused who has put his mental state in issue. Nevertheless, in my opinion, the exception in Sweeney is applicable where the accused adduces the expert opinion evidence of a psychiatrist founded upon an assessment including an interview of the accused. If the exception in Sweeney were not applicable in such circumstances, the problem considered by Bastarache J. in Charlebois would arise: the weight of the Crown’s evidence might be unfairly diminished by the fact that its experts have been denied access to the accused. 
 
Where the accused introduces evidence of statements he has made to his own expert, and has waived his right to silence to that extent, it is not contrary to the principles of fundamental justice to draw an inference from his refusal to speak to the Crown’s expert. However, the inference permissible in this circumstance is a limited one: that cooperating with the Crown’s expert might have been harmful to the defence case. The refusal is, in the words used in Charlebois, “relevant to the probative value of the defence expert’s evidence”: at para. 38. In the words of the Alberta Court of Appeal in Madood (at para. 106): “it is open to the Court to treat the defence expert opinion with skepticism”.
 
In the case at bar, the trial judge did not use the appellant’s refusal to be interviewed by Dr. Lohrasbe and Dr. Cooper as a fact that might be weighed in determining how much weight to place upon the opinion of the defence expert, Dr. Riar. Rather, the trial judge considered the refusal to be interviewed as evidence of the appellant’s distrust of people in authority, particularly those who might treat him in the community. In my respectful opinion, the use of the evidence of refusal for that purpose is not contemplated by the exception in Sweeney. It amounts to drawing an adverse inference from the exercise of the constitutionally‑protected right to silence and is impermissible. 
 
The Error was Immaterial 
 
The appellant’s non‑cooperation with the Crown experts was considered by the trial judge in the second phase of his analysis.
 
 In the first phase, the judge concluded that the Crown had shown the commission of a serious personal injury offence under s. 753(1)(a) beyond a reasonable doubt. (An appeal from conviction was dismissed by this Court on January 21, 2021, for reasons indexed at 2021 BCCA 24.) The Crown had also proven beyond a reasonable doubt that there had been a pattern of repetitive behaviour and “a failure by the appellant to constrain his actions against women”. That behaviour continued over many years and involved many different women. The judge concluded there was reason to believe that if the appellant were to be in the community, he would soon re‑offend against a woman in a violent manner. For that reason, he designated the appellant as a dangerous offender under s. 753(1)(a)(i) of the Code. 
 
The evidence considered by the sentencing judge included the appellant’s lengthy criminal record. His convictions were not disputed and, as the judge noted at para. 44: “the circumstances of the offences were supported in most cases with transcripts of the offences which provided some detail on the events which led to his convictions or guilty pleas.” 

The offences, particulars of which are described in the judge’s reasons but need not be repeated here, included, in addition to the index offence:

a) sexual assault in September 1985;
b) sexual assault in January 1986;
c) extortion, assault and procurement of two children into the sex trade in 1991; 
d) unlawful confinement in 1993 (an associated sexual assault was admitted by the defence but not charged);
e) uttering threats and mischief in August 1997; 
f) assault, uttering threats, resisting arrest, public mischief; assault with a weapon and breach of undertaking in May and October 1999;
g) aggravated assault; uttering threats; failure to comply; possession of a weapon in November 1999;
h) assault in October 2008; 
i) assault causing bodily harm; uttering threats; and unlawful confinement in the summer of 2010;
j) trespass and breach of a peace bond in 2013; and
k) attempting to obstruct justice and breach of court order by communicating with the victim of the index offence from prison after his April 2015 arrest.
 
Turning, then, to the penalty stage, the judge held (at para. 114) that there were many factors leading to the conclusion that the only sentence which could adequately protect the public from the commission of another serious offence would be an indeterminate sentence of imprisonment. One of the factors enumerated (at para. 115) was: 

(b) … Mr. Clayton has consistently been [averse] to treatment and lacks the motivation to change and end his criminal ways. Both Drs. Lohrasbe and Riar believe there is little evidence Mr. Clayton is treatable and have found little if any motivation on his part to enter serious treatment. As stated previously, he has consistently blamed his victims for his offending, has declined treatment and when he has agreed to entering programs, has failed to follow through with treatment. 
 
The conclusion of the judge’s penalty analysis appears to incorporate the view that the appellant has a deep mistrust of those who have attempted to work with him in assessing his likelihood of re‑offending in a violent manner:

For the above reasons and with reference to his lack of motivation to improve his behaviour discussed previously in these reasons, the public cannot be adequately protected from Mr. Clayton for the foreseeable future if he is released into the public arena. [Emphasis added.]
 
The evidence, excluding the appellant’s unwillingness to be interviewed by the defence experts, amply supports the conclusion the appellant was averse to treatment and distrustful of persons in authority.
 
The evidence included the records of the Correctional Service of Canada, Nova Scotia Provincial Corrections and British Columbia Corrections. These detailed the appellant’s behaviour and his dealings with authority during his lengthy periods in prison. The records included a report written in October 1987, following a psychological assessment authored by Dr. J. Gerry (cited at para. 49 of the reasons of the sentencing judge) that indicated the appellant was “not receptive to counselling about his offence”, was “defensive and unrealistic in his self‑concept”, and lacked “appropriate insight” into his serious offences. The author wrote: Perhaps he should consider marital counselling in the community, however he is not receptive to such suggestions now and basically denies he had a problem. Under these conditions he is a significant risk of similar violent recidivism. 
 
Relying on the records, the judge noted:
 
After being sentenced for his second federal offence in 1993, any counselling was brief, approached with no commitment, and ended with Mr. Clayton rejecting advice and recommendations from the system.
 
Further:
 
At one point in the early 2000s he was referred to the Family Violence Program which he had previously sought, however, he was withdrawn from the program for refusing to participate. Another time, Mr. Clayton was referred to the Anger and Emotions Management Program which he had sought, but would not meet the criteria for the program. On one occasion, the PBC described Mr. Clayton as having a persistent attitude of blaming others for not taking programming that would be available to him.
 
Reports from the Nova Scotia Correctional Authorities and British Columbia Corrections showed that he consistently denied case management, engaged in fighting, breaking institutional rules and was defiant to officials. In B.C, in 2016 he was placed on a waiting list for Respectful Relationships and Violence Prevention programming but did not apply for the same nor did he participate in any way.
 
Most significantly, in my view, the judge also had a report and the testimony of Dr. Kulwant Riar, who had been retained by the defence. Dr. Riar had the advantage of a personal interview of the appellant and wrote a report dated April 13, 2018. At p. 12 of his report Dr. Riar wrote: I noted that he had displayed anti-authority attitudes almost regularly whenever he was incarcerated. His own understanding is that he did not get along with the staff during his recent incarceration as his background information was disclosed to other inmates and he became the target of abuse from other inmates and staff. On the contrary, his attitudes and behaviour remained the same throughout the years, starting from his first and second incarcerations. He frequently disobeyed the staff, broke the rules of the custody facility and frequently had been disrespectful and verbally abusive towards staff. 
 
Given Dr. Riar’s clear findings regarding the appellant’s anti‑authority attitudes and behaviours—in addition to the other evidence to this effect in the record—I am of the opinion that the error identified by the appellant occasioned no substantial wrong or miscarriage of justice.
 
In Charlebois, Bastarache J. described the application of the curative proviso as follows: 

10 Section 686(1)(b)(iii) of the Code authorizes an appeal court to dismiss an appeal, despite the presence of an error at trial, where the court believes there has been no “substantial wrong or miscarriage of justice”. In Mahoney v. The Queen, 1982 CanLII 21 (SCC), [1982] 1 S.C.R. 834, at p. 852, McIntyre J. explained how the Court is to determine whether a substantial wrong or miscarriage of justice has occurred: [T]he proviso may be applied only following a legal determination that errors have been made at trial, but that “no substantial wrong or miscarriage of justice has occurred”, and then only according to a strict legal test. The determination of what will constitute a substantial wrong or miscarriage of justice must involve the construction of those words in the context in which they are used in the Statute, and such statutory construction has long been considered a matter of law. The Court’s decision involves an analysis of the rights accorded by law to an accused and the measurement of the impact of the errors which were made at trial. Once an appellant establishes in the Court of Appeal that errors of law were made at his trial he becomes entitled to have his appeal allowed and a new trial or an acquittal, depending on the circumstances, unless the proviso is applied to annul those rights. The Court of Appeal must consider the errors against the background of the whole trial. While a reconsideration of the evidence is involved, clearly the inquiry goes far beyond the determination of matters of fact. [Emphasis added by Bastarache J.] …

11 The proper application of s. 686(1)(b)(iii) was recently addressed in R. v. Brooks, [2000] 1 S.C.R. 237, 2000 SCC 11. Writing for the dissent, Major J. adopted his statement in R. v. Bevan, 1993 CanLII 101 (SCC), [1993] 2 S.C.R. 599, which precisely outlines the threshold for applying the proviso. Major J. confirmed at para. 104 that the task of the appellate court is to determine whether there is any reasonable possibility that the verdict would have been different had the error at issue not been made. Implicit in my reasons in Brooks is my acceptance of his statement as a proper explanation of the law. As conceded by the Crown, the proviso should only be applied where the evidence is so overwhelming that a trier of fact would inevitably convict. In such circumstances, depriving the accused of a proper trial is justified on the ground that the deprivation is minimal when the invariable result would be another conviction. (R. v. S. (P.L.), 1991 CanLII 103 (SCC), [1991] 1 S.C.R. 909, at p. 916)
 
The error in this case was to draw an impermissible inference from the appellant’s silence during a court‑ordered assessment. This error did not result in a miscarriage of justice because there was ample evidence in the record—aside from the impermissible inference—establishing that the appellant had longstanding and deeply ingrained anti‑authority attitudes. The evidence of the appellant’s anti‑authority attitudes was so overwhelming that there was no reasonable possibility that the sentencing judge would have arrived at a different conclusion on sentencing had the impermissible inference not been made. 
 
I would dismiss the appeal.


./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/ca/2023bcca4.html

After a trial by judge alone in the Supreme Court, Thomas Bert Prins was convicted of seven offences. The convictions were entered on September 8, 2017.

Five of the convictions arose from three incidents that occurred over ten days in May and June 2012. 

In the first incident, Mr. Prins was found to have robbed a BC Ferries employee of $20 cash at the Horseshoe Bay terminal. He used a firearm during the robbery and wore a balaclava.

The second incident involved breaking through the front glass door of a gas station in Squamish using a sledgehammer and stealing various items.

In the third incident, Mr. Prins was found guilty of robbing someone who was leaving their work at a golf centre in Surrey. He also used a firearm in this robbery and wore a balaclava. Mr. Prins took the victim’s keys, vehicle, wallet and mobile device.

As part of their investigation, the police conducted an undercover “Mr. Big” operation. Mr. Prins talked to the undercover officers about one or more of the offences. The details he provided to them became evidence at the trial following an admissibility voir dire.

The police also gathered forensic evidence in the investigation, including DNA evidence and video surveillance, and they took one or more statements from an acquaintance of Mr. Prins who told the police that Mr. Prins had described the offences to him (“SW”).

In the context of the Mr. Big operation, Mr. Prins led police to the firearm that he said was used in the Surrey robbery (a handgun). It was buried in Stanley Park. Mr. Prins was not legally entitled to possess the firearm and this fact formed the basis for a sixth conviction. Mr. Prins was also convicted of uttering threats against SW (count 7 on the indictment). Among other things, he told the undercover officers that he wanted to have SW killed for implicating him in the crimes.

Prior to sentencing, Mr. Prins applied for a stay of proceedings based on unreasonable delay under s. 11(b) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms [Charter]. That application was summarily dismissed on the basis that it had no prospect of success. The trial judge found that the delay in getting to trial lay predominantly with the defence. Mr. Prins was represented by a lawyer at his trial.
 
For his seven offences, Mr. Prins was sentenced to a cumulative seven days’ imprisonment and one year of probation after receiving credit for the equivalent of seven years and 11 months’ pre-sentence custody. The sentences were imposed in March 2018.
 
Mr. Prins challenges the guilty verdicts for all seven offences. 

Adjournment Request
 
It has taken considerable time for this appeal to be heard. The appeal has been scheduled for hearing three times. Mr. Prins obtained adjournments of the first two hearings. With the assistance of case management, a third hearing date was set for December 13, 2022.
 
On December 13, Mr. Prins attended the hearing. He is self-represented. He sought another adjournment, saying he was not ready to proceed. He told the Court that he needs additional information before he will be in a position to fully advance his arguments. This includes information he wants to obtain from the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (“RCMP”) under the Access to Information Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. A-1, or by way of a production order pursuant to s. 683(1)(a) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46. Mr. Prins also said he wants to subpoena a lawyer that had been appointed to represent him in the appeal. The precise nature of the sought-after information or the reason for the subpoena is unclear, but it appears to relate to allegations of corruption or otherwise unfair treatment by the RCMP and prosecutors.
 
The Crown opposed the adjournment in light of the history of the appeal and the fact that Mr. Prins has had ample time since filing his notice of appeal to seek further information.
 
It is our view that the appeal should not be adjourned and, instead, determined on its merits.
 
Mr. Prins filed his notice of appeal in April 2018. In December 2019, a lawyer was appointed to represent him in the appeal. A transcript and an appeal book were filed in July 2020. Mr. Prins’ then-appointed lawyer filed a factum in May 2021. The appeal was scheduled for a hearing in November 2021; however, Mr. Prins discharged his appointed lawyer in October 2021. The appeal was adjourned and rescheduled for March 2022.
 
New lawyers were appointed for Mr. Prins. As we understand it, the March 2022 hearing was adjourned to accommodate their involvement; however, in June 2022, they also withdrew from the case because they had been discharged by Mr. Prins. A third hearing was then set for December 13, 2022. In preparation for the third hearing, Mr. Prins filed a “replacement” factum on August 31, 2022, as well as a letter with various complaints about the justice system and the manner in which he has been treated. At no point since filing his notice of appeal has Mr. Prins made an application for the production of documents in this Court, or filed a fresh evidence application attaching information that he considers relevant to the appeal.
 
This appeal has been outstanding for more than four and one-half years. The record shows that Mr. Prins has had substantial time and opportunity to prepare for the appeal. He has received the assistance of legal counsel, but has declined to avail himself of their services. The reasons he has provided for a third adjournment are vague and, on their face, appear to relate to matters that fall outside the scope of the appeal. Importantly, given the history of this matter, we have no confidence that if the appeal is re-scheduled, Mr. Prins will be prepared to proceed at the next hearing date.
 
At the December 13 hearing, Mr. Prins had opportunity to make submissions about the merits of his appeal. As noted, one of his previously-appointed lawyers filed a factum in May 2021, identifying and addressing specific grounds of appeal. This too was before the Court. Prior to December 13, Mr. Prins filed a duplicate copy of this same factum, with added commentary, as well as a letter raising additional complaints. This material also forms part of the record before us. The Crown filed response material, setting out its position on the grounds raised by Mr. Prins’ previous lawyer. The appeal file includes the reasons for conviction from the court below, admissibility rulings made at the trial, and a copy of the transcript.
 
On the whole of this, we are satisfied the Court can properly determine the appeal and we have proceeded accordingly.

The Trial Judgment
 
The reasons for conviction are indexed as 2017 BCSC 1722.
 
The trial judge began his analysis of the case by setting out the charges against Mr. Prins. He identified two “fundamental issues” for him to decide:

(a) the application of R. v. W. (D.), 1 S.C.R. 742, 1991 CanLII 93 (S.C.C.); and 
(b) the credibility and reliability of SW: at paras. 3–6.
 
The trial judge then reviewed the evidence relevant to each of the charged offences: at paras. 7–51. This included (but was not limited to): video evidence showing the robbery at the Horseshoe Bay ferry terminal; video evidence showing the break-in at the Squamish gas station; Mr. Prins’ DNA found in a balaclava near the gas station; admissions made by Mr. Prins’ during the Mr. Big operation; the firearm located in Stanley Park; and testimony from SW.
 
Mr. Prins and SW knew each other. Mr. Prins stayed with SW in May or early June 2012. While there, Mr. Prins told SW about things that caused SW concern and eventually led him to contact the police. The information included details of the Horseshoe Bay robbery, the Squamish break-in and the Surrey robbery. Mr. Prins had a firearm in his possession for part of the time that he was with SW. 
 
Mr. Prins urged the trial judge to reject the evidence of SW: at para. 54.
 
The trial judge did not do so. He found that “many of the details” provided by SW were corroborated by various witnesses who testified about the offences. The evidence of these witnesses was “quite independent of anything” said by SW: at para. 52.
 
The trial judge found that SW’s evidence of what Mr. Prins told him specific to the Horseshoe Bay robbery was independently corroborated by evidence from BC Ferries staff, video surveillance and police testimony: at para. 61. SW’s evidence about the information he received in relation to the Squamish break-in was supported by the DNA evidence on the balaclava: at para. 63. His testimony about the Surrey robbery was corroborated by police evidence, the victim of the offence, and Mr. Prins’ discussion with the Mr. Big operators: at para. 67. SW testified that the firearm Mr. Prins said was used in one or more of the offences was “embossed with a circle with a star inside”, was buried in Stanley Park, and required a specific type of ammunition. These details proved to be accurate when the firearm was located: at paras. 55–56. 
 
The trial judge found that SW’s evidence was credible and reliable: at para. 68. It was “supported by other sources and detail”: at paras. 68, 73. The trial judge also found that SW presented as a credible witness when he testified at the trial. When confronted with “errors, negative aspects of his character, or other aspects of his relationship with [Mr. Prins], he was quick to acknowledge or admit them”: at para. 69. He acknowledged substance abuse and stealing: at para. 70. He was “responsive and direct” in his evidence: at para. 72.
 
The trial judge found that SW’s testimony was “internally and externally consistent” (at para. 72), and that he was not “shaken” in cross-examination: at paras. 70–73.
 
A different result ensued from the trial judge’s assessment of Mr. Prins’ testimony. The relevant credibility findings are set out at paras. 74–85 of his reasons. Among other things, Mr. Prins’ evidence was found to be: internally and externally inconsistent; evasive; selective; confusing; and non-sensical.
 
Mr. Prins urged the trial judge to place no weight on any of the details he provided to the Mr. Big operators in relation to the charged crimes. He repeatedly said that those details came from an interview he had with the police prior to the Mr. Big operation (in August 2012), at which time the police shared details of the offences with him: at paras. 46, 54, 64, 65 and 78. In other words, he said the information he relayed to the police did not reflect his personal knowledge. He was simply parroting back to them what he had been told.
 
However, Mr. Prins told the undercover officers that he left a sledgehammer in the Squamish gas station after the break-in and this detail was not discussed during the evidence presentation by the police: at para. 78. For this reason, and others, the trial judge did not believe Mr. Prins. Nor did his evidence raise a reasonable doubt about his guilt: at para. 85.
 
After considering the evidence in its entirety, the trial judge found that the Crown had proved the essential elements of the charged offences, including that Mr. Prins was the perpetrator: at paras. 86–91.

On Appeal
 
In his notice of appeal, Mr. Prins alleged a number of errors by the trial judge. He said the trial judge: (a) failed to consider the totality of the evidence in assessing his credibility; (b) failed to appreciate the context of Mr. Prins’ dealings with the undercover officers and its impact on the reliability of what he said to them; (c) misapprehended evidence; (d) erred in summarily dismissing the application for a stay of proceedings based on unreasonable delay; and (e) erred in admitting the evidence of the Mr. Big operation.
 
The factum filed in May 2021, and relied upon by Mr. Prins for the purpose of the appeal, narrowed the grounds of appeal. The factum: (a) alleges misapprehensions of the evidence in finding corroboration for SW’s testimony; (b) alleges misapprehensions of the evidence in finding that some of the details provided to the undercover officers by Mr. Prins could only have come from his personal knowledge; and (c) requests a new trial so that Mr. Prins can seek a Charter remedy based on time spent in administrative segregation. The factum does not allege unfairness in the trial process or challenge the trial judge’s assessment of credibility and reliability on bases other than the alleged misapprehensions of evidence.
 
As noted, in addition to the May 2021 and duplicate factums, Mr. Prins filed a letter with the Court raising various other matters. The letter is wide-ranging and alleges corruption in the investigating police force, the prosecution system and the courts. The letter is difficult to follow. The allegations are unsubstantiated (Mr. Prins has not filed a fresh evidence application), and, as such, we have considered the letter only to the extent that anything mentioned in it finds a foundation in the trial record.
 
Mr. Prins’ oral submissions on December 13 were also wide-ranging and they repeated allegations of corruption against the police, the Crown and the courts. As with the letter, the submissions were disjointed and difficult to follow. Some of the submissions touched on the facts of the case, the Mr. Big evidence and the reliability of the DNA evidence. Others related to ongoing difficulty that Mr. Prins says he is experiencing with the RCMP, the death of his mother while he was in custody awaiting his trial, alleged police harassment of his sister, and the purported suppression of his personal freedoms by the state.
 
Ultimately, we consider it appropriate to state the grounds of appeal that have been articulated, advanced and developed on behalf of Mr. Prins as follows:
 
a) whether the trial judge misapprehended evidence and, if so, whether the misapprehensions were essential to his reasoning process in either admitting evidence at the trial, or in finding guilt; and, 
b) whether Mr. Prins should be granted leave to raise a new issue on appeal, namely, the availability of a Charter remedy arising from in-custody segregation while awaiting trial.

Discussion
 
We will address each of the grounds of appeal in turn.

a) Did the Trial Judge Misapprehend Evidence?

Under s. 686(1)(a)(iii) of the Criminal Code, a misapprehension of evidence can result in a miscarriage of justice and require a new trial. The test to meet was helpfully explained in R. v. Osinde, 2021 BCCA 124:
 
A misapprehension of evidence will warrant appellate intervention where the trial judge makes mistakes “as to the substance of material parts of the evidence and those errors play an essential part in the reasoning process resulting in a conviction”: R. v. Morrissey (1995), 1995 CanLII 3498 (ON CA), 97 C.C.C. (3d) 193 at 221 (Ont. C.A.); R. v. Lohrer, 2004 SCC 80 at para. 1, 3 S.C.R. 732. A misapprehension of the evidence “may refer to a failure to consider evidence relevant to a material issue, a mistake as to the substance of the evidence, or a failure to give proper effect to the evidence”: Morrissey at 218.
 
Where there is a material misapprehension of evidence that played an essential role in the reasoning process underlying a conviction, the appellant will not have received a fair trial and a miscarriage of justice will have occurred: Morrissey at 221; Lohrer at para. 1. One way to assess whether there has been a miscarriage of justice is to ask whether striking the error would leave the trial judge’s reasoning that led to conviction on unsteady ground: R. v. Sinclair, 2011 SCC 40 at para. 56, 3 S.C.R. 3.
 
Although a trial judge is uniquely positioned to make credibility assessments, where those assessments are based on misapprehensions of evidence and played a critical role in reaching a conviction, the assessments and the verdict will be insupportable: R. v. C.L.Y., 2008 SCC 2 at para. 21, 1 S.C.R. 5. This is so even when the evidence adduced at the trial was capable of supporting a conviction: Lohrer at para. 1.
 
Demonstrating a misapprehension is a high standard for an appellant. They must point to a plainly identifiable error, not merely suggest that the judge may have erred: “[t]he plain language or the thrust of the reasons must disclose an actual mistake”: Sinclair at para. 53. Additionally, as noted, the error must be material. And, in deciding whether a material misapprehension resulted in a miscarriage of justice, an appellate court may ask itself whether the misapprehension, once removed, could plausibly have left the judge with a reasonable doubt: Sinclair at paras. 56–57, 59, 61–62. If so, then the reasoning that led to a conviction is based on “unsteady ground”: Sinclair at para. 56. If not, then the misapprehension was likely not central to the judge’s reasoning process.
 
Mr. Prins says the trial judge misapprehended three parts of the evidence.
 
First, the evidence gathered during the Mr. Big operation included evidence of inculpatory statements made by Mr. Prins in relation to one or more of the charged offences. SW’s evidence was considered by the trial judge in assessing the admissibility of these statements: 2016 BCSC 2239. When summarizing SW’s testimony in his reasons on the Mr. Big voir dire, the trial judge stated that Mr. Prins told SW that the BC Ferries worker who was the victim of the Horseshoe Bay robbery injured his knees (a fact testified to by the victim). The Crown accepts that SW did not include this detail in his evidence.
 
In our view, this mistake was neither material nor central to the admissibility ruling.
 
The trial judge noted in his reasons on the voir dire that various other details provided by SW specific to the Horseshoe Bay robbery were independently and objectively confirmed by surveillance videos that captured the relevant events. It is also clear from a reading of the reasons, as a whole, that the evidence of SW was not the only evidence that led the trial judge to conclude the inculpatory statements should form part of the trial proper. The determination that the Crown met its onus to establish that the probative value of the Mr. Big statements outweighed their prejudicial effect on a balance of probabilities properly rested on an assessment of the evidence in its totality, not just the evidence of SW: R. v. Hart, 2014 SCC 52 at paras. 10, 85 and 89.
 
The trial judge delivered comprehensive reasons on the Mr. Big voir dire. The May 2021 and duplicate factums do not suggest that he applied an incorrect legal framework in assessing the admissibility of the Mr. Big evidence, or that he made errors other than the alleged misapprehension of evidence. In his reasons, the trial judge noted that in challenging the admissibility of the Mr. Big evidence, Mr. Prins was represented by “very able counsel with strong advocacy skills and [the trial judge received] clear final submissions including both oral and detailed written submissions”: at para. 13. The evidence was closely scrutinized. We do not see reversible error here.
 
We note that in his reasons for conviction, the trial judge did not make the same mistake about SW’s evidence. Consequently, even if the misapprehension that manifested itself on the voir dire could properly be characterized as material, there is no indication that it played an essential role in the reasoning process underlying Mr. Prins’ convictions and thereby resulted in a miscarriage of justice.
 
The second alleged misapprehension of evidence also relates to SW.
 
The Crown acknowledged at the trial that SW was an important Crown witness whose credibility and reliability was a live issue. Indeed, the trial judge described SW’s credibility as a “significant” issue for him to resolve: 2017 BCSC 1722 at para. 52. SW’s evidence was vigorously challenged by the defence. Ultimately, the trial judge accepted what SW had to say.
 
At para. 62 of his reasons for conviction, the trial judge stated that in his testimony about the Squamish break-in, SW said Mr. Prins told him that a “sledgehammer was used to break the door”. The Crown accepts that SW did not mention a “sledgehammer” as a tool used by Mr. Prins. Instead, in direct examination, he was asked by Crown counsel whether Mr. Prins told him about things he may have used to assist with the offence. Among other things, SW said he was told Mr. Prins used “[a] hammer, from what [he] understood”.
 
We would not characterize the trial judge’s reference to a “sledgehammer” in para. 62 as a mistake of any substance. SW did not use the word “sledgehammer” in describing what Mr. Prins told him; however, he did say that Mr. Prins told him he used a hammer to assist with the Squamish break-in and, objectively, this is what actually occurred. Video surveillance showed the glass door to the gas station being broken with a sledgehammer. When the police entered the store after-the-fact, they found that a sledgehammer had been left there by the perpetrator. 
 
We are also of the view that even if the trial judge’s misstatement could be characterized as material, it was not essential to his reasoning process in convicting Mr. Prins of the Squamish break-in. Removing this factor from the foundation underlying the verdict would not leave it on “unsteady ground”: R. v. Sinclair, 2011 SCC 40 at para. 56.
 
As noted, the trial judge found that many details provided by SW were corroborated by other evidence and that this enhanced his overall credibility and reliability as a witness. He also found that the identification of Mr. Prins as the perpetrator of the Squamish break-in was supported by the admissions he made to the undercover officers. There was also DNA evidence directly linking him to a balaclava found near the scene. The conviction for breaking and entering the gas station was not dependent on SW having identified a sledgehammer (as opposed to a “hammer”), as the tool used by Mr. Prins. This was simply one piece in a much larger puzzle.
 
The third alleged misapprehension of evidence relates to the testimony of Mr. Prins.
 
Mr. Prins told the Mr. Big operators about the Squamish break-in. He said he tried to break into the gas station a night earlier using a rock. Then, on the evening in question, he used a sledgehammer and left it inside the store.

At the trial, Mr. Prins urged the trial judge to find that all of the details of the crimes he provided to the undercover operators came from an interview that he had with the police in August 2012, or from something he read in a local newspaper. In response to the latter submission, the trial judge said this in his reasons for conviction:
 
In the circumstances of this case, that proposition does not explain the reference by the accused to the use of a sledgehammer and the fact that the sledgehammer was left inside the Shell station. None of this was referred to at any time, during the evidence presentation conducted during the initial police interview of the accused. Also, there was no reference to the sledgehammer in the Squamish newspaper article. Only the perpetrator of the break-in at the Shell station could know about the abandoned sledgehammer or be able to tell S.W. that a hammer was used to gain entry to the Shell station. Shortly put, the explanation given by the accused that he learned the details of these crimes as a result of the evidence presentation by the police is simply untenable and is not credible. [Emphasis added.]
 

The trial judge was only partially correct. The police did not mention a sledgehammer when they interviewed Mr. Prins prior to the Mr. Big operation. However, there was a newspaper article that referenced a sledgehammer in relation to the Squamish break-in. The article was published before the Mr. Big operation and stated as follows: A Squamish gas station had its glass front door smashed not once but twice in the past week in separate break, enter and theft attempts. … RCMP Sgt. Wayne Pride said in a statement. A sledgehammer was used to break through the front door. Stolen were chips, pop and chocolate bars, and an unsuccessful attempt was made to steal cigarettes. A police services dog was brought to the scene and a number of items were seized for evidence … [Emphasis added.]
 
The article did not make mention of a sledgehammer having been left in the store. Mr. Prins acknowledged this fact in his testimony at the trial.
 
As with the other alleged misapprehensions, we do not see this misstatement by the trial judge as being material or, more importantly, critical to his rejection of Mr. Prins’ testimony that he did not have personal knowledge of the details he provided to the undercover officers.
 
The fact of the sledgehammer being left in the store was not mentioned by the police to Mr. Prins, or referred to in the newspaper article. As such, it was open to the trial judge to find that contrary to Mr. Prins’ testimony, this was something that must have been within his personal knowledge. On a fair reading of the reasons for conviction, it was this aspect of Mr. Prins’ statements about the sledgehammer that carried the most significance with the trial judge in rejecting the suggestion that everything Mr. Prins knew about the Squamish break-in came from the police or from a newspaper article: at para. 78.
 
Moreover, the trial judge had a number of other reasons for rejecting Mr. Prins’ evidence, including: internal and external inconsistencies; evasiveness; selective responses; and a conclusion that, overall, “his evidence simply did not make sense”: at para. 74. In this context, it cannot reasonably be said that if the trial judge properly understood that the newspaper article included a reference to a sledgehammer, there is a realistic possibility he would have believed Mr. Prins or found that his evidence raised a reasonable doubt. Again, the evidence about Mr. Prins’ knowledge of a sledgehammer having been used in the break and enter, whether derived from the testimony of SW or from admissions made during the Mr. Big operation, formed only one part of a large body of evidence connecting Mr. Prins, directly and circumstantially, to the Squamish break-in.
 
As recently noted by this Court in R. v. S.S., 2022 BCCA 392, appellants who seek a new trial based on one or more misapprehensions of the evidence face a “high standard”: at para. 51. They must show that their conviction(s) “depend[ed] on a misapprehension of the evidence and the misapprehension [went] to the substance rather than the detail of the trial judge’s reasons”: at para. 53, italics in the original. In our view, Mr. Prins has not met this test. 

b) Should Mr. Prins be Granted Leave to Raise a New Issue?

Mr. Prins spent time in administrative segregation while in custody awaiting his trial. In his oral submissions before us, he indicated that he may have spent as many as 18 months in a unit for the “mentally disordered”. He said doing so has had a significant detrimental impact on him. He did not raise this issue before the trial judge as a basis for seeking a remedy under s. 24(1) of the Charter, including a stay of proceedings.
 
We understand from the May 2021 factum that since his release from custody, Mr. Prins has filed a civil action against the Attorney General of British Columbia claiming damages arising from his segregation. On appeal, he asks that we order a new trial pursuant to s. 686(2)(b) of the Criminal Code, so that he can also seek a remedy in respect of the seven convictions.
 
Although this issue was not raised at the trial, Mr. Prins says the law on administrative segregation has evolved since then and there is now greater clarity on the individual effects of segregation, the circumstances in which it may constitute a Charter violation, and the availability of a remedy under s. 24(1) or otherwise.
 
Relying upon cases such as R. v. Lilgert, 2014 BCCA 493 and R. v. Anderson, 2021 BCCA 101, the Crown says Mr. Prins requires leave to raise this issue for the first time on appeal and he has not met the requisite test.
 
Mr. Prins has not filed a notice under the Constitutional Question Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 68, seeking a s. 24(1) remedy, which is a necessary pre-requisite to this Court considering the matter. Nor is there an evidentiary record from which to properly assess the Charter claim, or even whether it has an air of reality to it. There was passing reference to Mr. Prins’ segregation at the trial and he mentioned it in his testimony. (He testified that he was in segregation, had been there for a considerable period of time, and he described the unit as one “for troublemakers and people that do not have the mental capacity to stay on a unit”.) However, Mr. Prins did not adduce evidence of the details surrounding that segregation at his trial, how it came about, the underlying reasons, or its effects on him. The Crown says the law as it existed at the time of the trial would have enabled Mr. Prins to raise the issue and, even if there were no relevant legal authorities on point (which the Crown disputes), he was not precluded from doing so.
 
In the circumstances of this case, we are of the view that Mr. Prins should not be granted leave to raise an alleged Charter violation for the first time on appeal and to seek an appellate remedy on that basis.

As explained by Justice Dickson in R. v. Alfred, 2020 BCCA 384, there are “rare occasions” in which appellate courts will grant leave to raise a new issue on appeal, including in relation to constitutional issues. However:
 
… Before doing so … the court carefully scrutinizes the new issue and considers all of the circumstances, including the state of the record, fairness to all parties, the importance of resolving the issue, its suitability for decision and the broader interests of the administration of justice: Guindon v. Canada, 2015 SCC 41 at para. 20. Taking into account all relevant factors, the court may decide to hear the new issue, but that discretion will be exercised “sparingly and only where the interests of justice require it”: R. v. Trieu, 2010 BCCA 540 at para. 56. As Justice Doherty stated in R. v. Roach, 2009 ONCA 156, an appellate court “must be satisfied that the new issue raised on appeal can be fully, effectively and fairly addressed on appeal even though it was not raised at trial”: at para. 7. [Emphasis added.]
 
To obtain a new trial under the Criminal Code, Mr. Prins must establish:
 
(i) an unreasonable verdict;
(ii) an error of law; or
(iii) a miscarriage of justice: s. 686(1)(a). A “miscarriage of justice” arises where a proved irregularity at the trial is “severe enough to [have rendered] the trial unfair or to [have created] the appearance of unfairness”: R. v. Khan, 2001 SCC 86 at para. 69, LeBel J., concurring in the result.
 
This Court does not have a general power to remit criminal cases back to the trial court to pursue a constitutional argument not made there. The case cited in the May 2021 factum, R. v. Brown, 2 S.C.R. 918, 1993 CanLII 114, does not stand for that proposition. In R. v. Johnston, 2021 BCCA 34, the Court remitted a case to the Supreme Court for the sole purpose of hearing and determining a constitutional application, but that was a situation in which the application had been made in the trial court, was decided after findings of guilt, and this Court determined that the trial judge legally erred in resolving it: at paras. 6–7 and 430–432. The case before us is not the same.
 
Instead, Mr. Prins requires leave to raise a new issue and, to grant him an appellate remedy, we would have to assess the merits of the Charter claim.
 
In our view, the administrative segregation issue cannot be “fully, effectively and fairly addressed on appeal”: R. v. Roach, 2009 ONCA 156 at para. 7. Whether there has been a Charter infringement and whether Mr. Prins is entitled to a remedy requires a fact-intensive analysis grounded in evidence that is missing from the record, including a likely need for expert opinion evidence on the effects of the segregation on Mr. Prins’ physical and mental well-being. None of that is before us. We do not intend, in any way, to be dismissive of Mr. Prins’ concerns about the use of administrative segregation in his circumstances. However, on the record in this appeal, it would not be appropriate for the Court to engage in the sought-after analysis, effectively standing as a court of first instance in relation to a matter that could have been raised before the trial judge, but was not.
 
On the face of it, this issue appears to have been something that was either not considered by Mr. Prins or his counsel at the trial, or, the decision to not apply for a remedy was a tactical or strategic choice. It is clear from the trial transcript that Mr. Prins’ lawyer was aware of the fact of Mr. Prins’ segregation, its duration and the possible underlying rationale, at one point mentioning that Mr. Prins had been assaulted while in custody and was segregated for that reason.
 
Mr. Prins has not alleged that his trial counsel was ineffective within the meaning of R. v. G.D.B., 2000 SCC 22. There is no evidence to suggest that Mr. Prins gave instructions to his counsel to raise the issue of segregation for the purpose of a Charter application, but it was not pursued. In his reasons for admitting the Mr. Big evidence, the trial judge noted that Mr. Prins testified on the admissibility voir dire and, while he “espoused political and racial beliefs which would not have wide popularity”, he did not display “unusual vulnerabilities”: 2016 BCSC 2239 at para. 119. The trial record does not reveal a link between the administrative segregation and Mr. Prins’ ability to make full answer and defence, or some other form of trial unfairness.
 
In the circumstances, we would not grant leave to pursue this issue for the first time on appeal.

Disposition
 
The application for an adjournment is denied and the appeal from conviction is dismissed.
 
Mr. Prins has not established misapprehensions of evidence at his trial that warrant appellate intervention under s. 686(1)(a)(iii) of the Criminal Code.
 
Nor is this a case in which it would be proper for the Court to consider an issue raised for the first time on appeal in support of a finding that there has been a miscarriage of justice. 


./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/ca/2023bcca29.html

The appellant appeals his conviction on charges of possession of cocaine and methamphetamine for the purpose of trafficking contrary to s. 5(2) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, S.C. 1996, c. 19.

In the course of executing a search warrant, police searched the appellant’s vehicle. Inside the trunk of the vehicle was a backpack containing a significant amount of cocaine and methamphetamine. The appellant was the owner and sole occupant of the vehicle. 

The only issue at trial was whether the Crown had proven beyond a reasonable doubt that the appellant had knowledge of the drugs. The trial judge found that the appellant’s guilt was the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the circumstantial evidence. 

The appellant says the trial judge erred in his approach to assessing circumstantial evidence. He seeks an order setting aside his conviction and directing a new trial. 

Factual Background

Between October 31 and November 23, 2017, the police conducted surveillance for drug activity on a residence and a storage facility in Abbotsford, B.C. The evidence at trial included CCTV footage from the storage facility. The main subject of the investigation, at least initially, was an individual named Brian MacDonald. Mr. MacDonald and his sons leased the storage locker that was a focus of the police surveillance (the “Locker”).

Two vehicles were observed on multiple occasions during the surveillance: a Lexus that was commonly driven by Mr. MacDonald, and a Nissan Altima owned by the appellant. In the course of the surveillance, the appellant was observed attending the residence and/or the storage facility on multiple occasions in either the Altima or the Lexus, accompanied by Mr. MacDonald or his son. The appellant and Mr. MacDonald were both observed carrying items to and from the storage facility, and accessing the Locker. 

The surveillance from November 8 captured Mr. MacDonald and his son in possession of a black backpack at the storage facility.

On two occasions—November 14 and 20, 2017—Mr. MacDonald was observed driving the appellant’s Altima alone to the storage facility. During his attendance at the storage facility, Mr. MacDonald was seen transporting items from the Altima into the Locker, and accessing the trunk of the Altima.

On November 22, 2017, the day before the appellant’s arrest, the Altima was observed parked in the driveway of the residence at 9:51 a.m. The Altima departed at 10:10 a.m. and returned at 10:41 a.m. When the Altima returned, the appellant was observed to be the driver and sole occupant. Later in the same day, Mr. MacDonald was observed driving the Lexus on three occasions: once he was alone, once he was with his son, and the third time he was leaving the residence with the appellant.
 
November 23, 2017 was “takedown day”, which involved the execution of search warrants and arrests. Mr. MacDonald was arrested in the Lexus that afternoon. A team of officers attended the residence for the purpose of executing the search warrant. 
 
The appellant arrived at the residence alone in the Altima at approximately 4:46 p.m. on November 23. He was arrested and searched incident to arrest. In his possession were keys to the Altima, a knife, his wallet, and a total of $910 in cash.
 
Police officers also searched the Altima. The trunk of the vehicle was accessed with a fob that was attached to the keys found on the appellant at the time of his arrest. Inside the trunk there was a black backpack with the zipper closed. Quantities of methamphetamine and crack cocaine were found in the backpack. The cocaine had a value of between approximately $5,000 and $5,600 if sold in bulk, and about $10,000 if sold at the street level in .1 gram amounts. The methamphetamine had an approximate bulk value of between $13,000 and $16,000 and a value of $56,000 if sold at the street level in .1 gram amounts. 
 
The appellant admitted at trial that the amount and value of the drugs seized from the Altima were consistent only with possession for the purpose of trafficking. The defence did not call evidence. The only live issue at trial was whether the Crown had proven beyond a reasonable doubt that the appellant had knowledge of the drugs, so as to establish that he had possession within the meaning of s. 4(3) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 [Code].

The Reasons for Judgment
 
At the outset of his reasons, the trial judge noted that the Crown’s case was a circumstantial one: at para. 1. He cited R. v. Villaroman, 2016 SCC 33 [Villaroman] as the most recent statement of the law on circumstantial evidence. He quoted from para. 37 of Villaroman, which directs trial judges in assessing circumstantial evidence to consider “other reasonable possibilities” that are inconsistent with an accused’s guilt: at para. 2. The trial judge stated that he considered two other cases: R. v. To, 1992 CanLII 913 (BC CA), B.C.J. No. 1700 (C.A.) [To] and R. v. Chualna, 2003 BCCA 650.

The live issue at trial was stated by the trial judge as follows:
 
The question raised in this circumstantial case is whether there are other reasonable possibilities from the evidence that the defendant did not have knowledge of the drugs in his vehicle. The defence says the drugs could have been concealed in the trunk by another person.

The defence argued at trial that it was evident from the surveillance evidence that the appellant did not have exclusive possession of the Altima, which gave rise to a plausible alternative explanation of the presence of drugs in the trunk; that is, that they were put there by someone else without the appellant’s knowledge. The trial judge stated:
 
I do not disagree, having reviewed the evidence, that indeed [MacDonald] had used the vehicle on November 14th and 20th. From the CCTV a variety of items were being moved to and from the storage unit and other items were being moved about in the Altima from the trunk to the backseat. However, [while] this may establish some past permissive use of the Altima, it does not go further than that. It is not evidence which has created a plausible theory pointing to another alternative of possession and control on the offence date. Furthermore, it does not logically follow that there is a plausible alternate theory of possession and control given the three-day gap from [MacDonald’s] last use of the Altima until the arrest of the defendant. Throughout, I keep in mind the totality of the evidence.
 
The trial judge did not accept the defence submission that the gaps in the evidence as to the whereabouts of the Altima before the appellant’s arrest raised a plausible alternative theory as to how drugs came to be in the trunk of the appellant’s vehicle. The trial judge also did not accept that the evidence established that the backpack seen in the surveillance video from November 8 was the same as the one seized from the trunk of the appellant’s Altima. In any event, he noted that the only evidence of Mr. MacDonald’s past possession of a backpack was from November 8. The trial judge considered the 15 days between November 8 and the date of the offence to be a “significant time gap”. He concluded that there was no basis to infer that Mr. MacDonald had the backpack with him when he was driving the appellant’s Altima on November 20.
 
The trial judge noted, based on the surveillance evidence, the degree of “cooperative conduct” between the appellant and Mr. MacDonald. However, he did not conclude they were engaged in a joint venture: at para. 16.

The trial judge’s conclusions as to the appellant’s guilt are reflected in the following paragraphs:
 
At arrest the defendant is driving a vehicle he owns. Access to the trunk was gained through the use of his key fob. In the trunk within a backpack is methamphetamine and cocaine with a value ranging from $18,000 to $66,000. These drugs have a very high value. Entrusting this valuable commodity to an unwitting person is unlikely. It does not logically follow that some third party would have placed them in the trunk without the knowledge of the defendant. Common sense says otherwise. The only obvious and logical inference from the totality of the evidence is that the defendant had knowledge of the presence of the drugs in the trunk of his vehicle. He certainly had control.
 
The submissions by the defence are not plausible theories or reasonable possibilities which cast doubt on the Crown’s case. They do not amount to anything more than speculation and [do] not logically flow from the evidence presented by the Crown. 
 
The trial judge therefore concluded that the Crown had proven the appellant’s guilt on the charged offences beyond a reasonable doubt.

On Appeal
 
The appellant argues that the trial judge misapplied the legal test for assessing circumstantial evidence from Villaroman. More specifically, in his factum on appeal the appellant alleges the trial judge erred in: 

(1) Reversing the burden of proof in his analysis of the circumstantial evidence; and
(2) Failing to consider alternative inferences that were inconsistent with the appellant’s guilt, aside from theories suggested to him by the Crown and the defence.
 
The appellant maintains that his appeal raises questions of law that are reviewable for correctness. He seeks a new trial pursuant to s. 686(1)(a)(ii) of the Code.
 
The Crown says that the appellant’s arguments do not raise questions of law, but rather implicitly challenge the reasonableness of the trial judge’s conclusion. Thus, the only question on appeal is whether the guilty verdict was unreasonable and should be set aside pursuant to s. 686(1)(a)(i) of the Code.
 
Where there is a challenge to the reasonableness of the verdict in a circumstantial case, the appellate court’s task is to determine whether the trial judge, acting judicially, could reasonably have been satisfied that the accused’s guilt was the only reasonable conclusion available on the totality of the evidence: Villaroman at para. 55. It is for the trier of fact to draw the line that separates reasonable doubt from speculation, and such an assessment can only be set aside on appeal where it is unreasonable: R. v. Mero, 2020 BCCA 331 at para. 48; Villaroman at para. 71.
 
In assessing whether the appellant has established error by the trial judge, this Court must apply a functional and contextual approach to the reasons for judgment below. The reasons must be read as a whole and in the context of the record, the live issues at trial, and the positions taken by the parties: R. v. G.F., 2021 SCC 20 at para. 5.

Discussion 

Circumstantial Evidence

Where the Crown relies on circumstantial evidence to prove the offence, the trier of fact must be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the guilt of the accused is the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence as a whole. If a reasonable inference other than the guilt of the accused may be drawn, then the Crown has not met its burden of proof beyond reasonable doubt: Villaroman at para. 35. The proper approach to assessing circumstantial evidence is set out as follows in Villaroman:
 
When assessing circumstantial evidence, the trier of fact should consider “other plausible theor[ies]” and “other reasonable possibilities” which are inconsistent with guilt: R. v. Comba, 1938 CanLII 14 (ON CA), O.R. 200 (C.A.), at pp. 205 and 211, per Middleton J.A., aff’d 1938 CanLII 7 (SCC), S.C.R. 396; R. v. Baigent, 2013 BCCA 28, 335 B.C.A.C. 11, at para. 20; R. v. Mitchell, QCA 394 (AustLII), at para. 35. I agree with the appellant that the Crown thus may need to negative these reasonable possibilities, but certainly does not need to “negative every possible conjecture, no matter how irrational or fanciful, which might be consistent with the innocence of the accused”: R. v. Bagshaw, 1971 CanLII 13 (SCC), S.C.R. 2, at p. 8. “Other plausible theories” or “other reasonable possibilities” must be based on logic and experience applied to the evidence or the absence of evidence, not on speculation.
 
Of course, the line between a “plausible theory” and “speculation” is not always easy to draw. But the basic question is whether the circumstantial evidence, viewed logically and in light of human experience, is reasonably capable of supporting an inference other than that the accused is guilty.
 
Villaroman also makes clear that a reasonable inference that is inconsistent with guilt may arise from the evidence, or the absence of evidence: at para. 36. 

Alleged Error 1: Did the Trial Judge Err in Reversing the Burden of Proof? 

Appellant’s Position
 
The appellant argues that there are four passages in the reasons for judgment that reflect error in the trial judge’s approach to circumstantial evidence:

(1) At para. 12, the trial judge states that a plausible alternative theory of possession does not arise from Mr. MacDonald’s prior use of the Altima given the “three-day gap” between Mr. MacDonald’s last known use of the vehicle on November 20 and the appellant’s arrest on November 23. The appellant says that the trial judge’s analysis implies that the defence had the burden to fill the evidentiary gap in order to lend more plausibility to the theory that someone else had put the drugs in the trunk of the Altima without his knowledge;
(2) At para. 13, the trial judge rejects the defence argument that gaps in the evidence of the whereabouts of the Altima give rise to the “plausible alternative theory as to how the drugs came to be in the defendant’s vehicle”. The judge characterizes the argument as “conjecture amounting to speculation”. The appellant says this reflects a reversal of the burden of proof because it implies a “default theory” that the appellant placed the drugs in the trunk of the Altima, which the defence was obliged to counter; 
(3) At para. 14, the trial judge states that the evidence does not establish that the backpack seen in the CCTV footage of the storage facility on November 8 is the same as the backpack found in the trunk of the Altima. The appellant says this amounts to a reversal of the burden of proof because the judge placed the onus on the defence to prove it was the same backpack rather considering whether such a possibility could be “safely ruled out”; and 
(4) At para. 15, the trial judge highlighted the “significant time gap” between Mr. MacDonald’s possession of a black backpack and the arrest of the appellant. The appellant says this implies that the defence had the burden to fill the gap in the evidence.

The appellant generally argues that the trial judgment reflects the judge’s misconception about the defence’s submissions on gaps in the evidence, which were directed at pointing out shortcomings in the Crown’s case by demonstrating that the Crown had not met its burden.

Analysis
 
In assessing the appellant’s arguments, it is important to begin with an understanding of the trial judge’s basis for concluding that the Crown had proven its case beyond reasonable doubt. The reasons for judgment reflect that the trial judge correctly self-instructed that he had to consider whether the evidence, or absence of evidence, gave rise to reasonable possibilities that were inconsistent with guilt. He was clearly aware that the Altima was not under round-the-clock police surveillance leading up to the appellant’s arrest. The evidence as to the use of the Altima was addressed in the parties’ final submissions. The defence argued that the gaps in the evidence strengthened the alternative inference that someone else had placed the drugs in the trunk of the Altima. The Crown argued that gaps in the evidence about the prior use of the Altima did not impact the Crown’s case, which was based on evidence implicating the appellant as of the offence date.
 
The trial judge found that the appellant’s knowledge of the drugs at the time of the offence was proven beyond a reasonable doubt based on evidence of the appellant’s control and ownership of the Altima at the time of the offence, the appellant’s possession of a fob that opened the trunk, the high commercial value of the drugs, and the implausibility of a third party entrusting drugs of such quantity and value to someone with no knowledge of them. In reaching his conclusion, the trial judge considered and rejected the defence submission that the evidence, and absence of evidence, of the use of the Altima gave rise to any reasonable inference that was inconsistent with the appellant’s guilt. 
 
The appellant’s criticism of the trial judge’s reference to the three-day gap between the last observation of Mr. MacDonald using the Altima and the offence date must be viewed in this context. The three-day gap was relevant to the trial judge’s analysis because he found it weakened the alternative inference advanced by the defence that Mr. MacDonald was responsible for the drugs being in the appellant’s vehicle on the offence date. The reasons for judgment do not indicate, either expressly or impliedly, that the trial judge imposed an evidentiary burden on the appellant to prove that Mr. MacDonald had access to the Altima between November 20 and November 23. Instead, in determining whether the totality of the evidence proved the appellant’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, he considered both the evidence and the absence of evidence in order to assess the cogency of the Crown’s case and the plausibility of the alternative inference advanced by the defence. This is the process envisioned by Villaroman. Other reasonable possible inferences “… must be based on logic and experience applied to the evidence or the absence of evidence”: Villaroman at para. 37.
 
In his oral submissions on appeal, the appellant resiled somewhat from the position that the trial judge’s reference to the three-day gap amounted to a reversal of the burden of proof. Instead he suggests, as I understand his submission, that the trial judge erred in only considering whether the gaps in evidence about the prior use of the Altima undermined the defence case and not considering whether the gaps undermined the Crown’s case. For the reasons I have already stated, I do not consider this argument to be supported by a contextual reading of the reasons for judgment. The time that elapsed between Mr. MacDonald’s last known use of the Altima and the offence date had limited relevance to the Crown’s theory, which was based on evidence implicating the appellant as of the offence date. However, it was directly relevant to the strength of the alternative inference suggested by the defence that Mr. MacDonald had placed the drugs in the Altima without the appellant’s knowledge. The trial judge’s reasons are responsive to the arguments that were made to him by the parties. There is no indication that the trial judge failed to consider gaps in the evidence about the use of the Altima in assessing the Crown’s case. Rather, he drew an inference of knowledge based on the totality of the evidence.

I also see no merit in the appellant’s argument that paragraph 13 of the reasons for judgment indicates that the trial judge required the appellant to rebut the judge’s “default theory” that the appellant placed the drugs in the trunk of the Altima. Again, this mischaracterizes the basis for the trial judge’s finding that the offence had been proved beyond a reasonable doubt. It also ignores the context of paragraph 13, which is that the trial judge was addressing the defence’s argument. In final submissions at trial, defence counsel argued (Transcript, p. 118): Essentially, though, what we have here is a significant gap in the evidence with regards to how the drugs came to be in the trunk, or even in that backpack. … There’s no evidence of who placed that in the trunk, and there’s no evidence as to who placed the drugs in the backpack. And certainly it’s possible that the backpack may have been in the trunk and then the drugs were placed there at some later point, too.
 
This submission was consistent with the defence theory that Mr. MacDonald, or some other third party, had put the drugs in the trunk of the Altima without the appellant’s knowledge. That theory required the trial judge to comment on the identity of the individual who placed the drugs in the trunk of the vehicle. The Crown theory did not depend on a finding that the appellant placed the drugs in the trunk of the vehicle, and the trial judge made no finding on this point. Such a finding was not required in order to find the appellant guilty. Regardless of the manner by which the drugs were placed in the vehicle, the trial judge found that the circumstantial evidence established that the appellant had knowledge of the drugs as of the offence date. The trial judge did not assume a “default theory” that the appellant had put the drugs in the vehicle.
 
Finally, I see no reversible error in the trial judge’s treatment of the backpack evidence. The appellant relied on this evidence in support of the alternative inference that Mr. MacDonald had placed the drugs in the appellant’s vehicle without his knowledge. The appellant urged the trial judge to find that the backpacks were the same. The trial judge found that the evidence did not establish that they were. The trial judge’s factual finding does not amount to legal error. Villaroman does not displace the usual fact-finding role of a trial judge. The trier of fact in a circumstantial case is not required to assume all facts asserted by the defence are true unless they “can safely be ruled out”, as the appellant argues. Rather, Villaroman directs that the trier of fact must consider the evidence as a whole and determine whether it gives rise to reasonable inferences that are inconsistent with guilt. The appellant’s guilt in this case did not turn on whether the backpack was the same. The trial judge did not state, expressly or impliedly, that there was any burden on the defence to adduce evidence to show the backpacks were the same in order to raise a reasonable doubt.
 
The trial judge also did not suggest that the appellant was obliged to call further evidence to address the 15-day gap between the CCTV footage of Mr. MacDonald with the backpack and the offence date. There is no suggestion in the judgment that the appellant had an evidentiary burden to fill the 15-day gap.
 
In sum, the trial judge’s analysis was responsive to the arguments advanced by the appellant at trial, and he correctly stated and applied the law on the criminal standard of proof in circumstantial cases. The trial judge did not reverse the burden of proof, or otherwise apply uneven treatment to the evidence.
 
For these reasons I would not accede to this ground of appeal. 
 
Alleged Error 2: Did the Trial Judge Err in Failing to Consider Alternative Inferences Not Proposed by the Parties? 
 
The second error alleged by the appellant is that the trial judge failed to consider plausible alternative inferences to the appellant’s guilt other than those proposed by the parties. In particular, the appellant says the trial judge ought to have expressly considered the possibility that a third party, perhaps Mr. MacDonald, left the drugs in the trunk of the Altima accidentally or negligently rather than by deliberate design, and then forgot about them. The appellant says the possibility that a third party may have accidentally left the drugs in the vehicle undermines the trial judge’s analysis, which is focussed on the implausibility of a third party entrusting such a valuable quantity of drugs to someone with no knowledge of the drugs. 
 
As a related point, the appellant argues that the trial judge was likely misled by the judgment of this Court in To, which is one of the cases he noted in his judgment. The appellant emphasizes the material factual differences between the circumstances of To and the present case. Of particular note, in To the accused testified that he had been entrusted with the drugs without being told what they were, and there was evidence of the accused placing the drugs in a vehicle. In the present case, the appellant did not testify, and there is no evidence as to how the drugs got into the trunk of the Altima. The appellant therefore says that in this case, unlike To, there were alternative inferences that could be drawn other than the appellant being entrusted with the drugs.
 
I am not persuaded by the appellant’s argument. The trial judge considered the totality of the evidence and concluded that the only reasonable inference that could be drawn was that the appellant had knowledge and control of the drugs. The trial judge did not expressly address the alternative possibility that the appellant now advances for the first on the appeal. However, he was not required to. While the trial judge did have to consider all reasonable possibilities inconsistent with the appellant’s guilt, he was not required to consider alternatives based on conjecture and speculation. The theory that Mr. MacDonald, or someone else, may have negligently left a significant quantity of valuable drugs in the trunk of the Altima and then forgot about them is no less speculative than the theory that the drugs were deliberately entrusted to the appellant without his knowledge.
 
There is also no indication in the trial judge’s reasons that he treated the judgment in To as if the facts were indistinguishable. To was a relevant authority, and the trial judge made only passing reference to it. The trial judge’s conclusions were based on the evidence in this case, assessed within the framework set out in Villaroman.
 
As Villaroman instructs, the role of this Court on appeal is to determine whether the trial judge’s conclusion was reasonable in light of the totality of the evidence, not to focus on hypothetical alternatives theories: at paras. 65 and 69. The trial judge’s reasons, read functionally and contextually, demonstrate that he properly stated and applied the law. The verdict is one that a properly instructed trier of fact, acting judicially, could reasonably have rendered.

Disposition

I would dismiss the appeal.


./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/sc/2023bcsc50.html
 
John Wendell Keyler is before this Court in respect of two charges. The first is that on July 7, 2020, at or near Taylor, British Columbia, he committed the second-degree murder of Sarah Foord. The second charge alleges that Mr. Keyler, on or about July 7, 2020, at or near Taylor, British Columbia, did improperly or indecently interfere with, or offer an indignity to, a dead human body or human remains, namely those of Sarah Foord.

Mr. Keyler has entered pleas of not guilty in respect of each of these charges. Following voir dires dealing with the admissibility of certain statements, a fairly abbreviated trial proceeded, by judge alone, over seven days at the end of October and into November 2022. 

The case for the Crown was substantially comprised of an Agreed Statement of Facts that was filed. In addition, two other witnesses were called by the prosecution. The defendant himself testified and called the evidence of four witnesses, two of whom were qualified as experts.

Following the submissions of counsel, judgment was reserved.

These are this Court’s reasons for judgement. 

The Circumstances 

In July 2020, Mr. Keyler and Ms. Foord were living together in a common law relationship. They were resident at her house, a mobile home, located in Taylor, British Columbia. At the time, Ms. Foord was 38 years of age; Mr. Keyler was 35 years old.

My understanding is that they had been in a romantic relationship for approximately 16 months. 

Mr. Keyler was primarily employed in the oil and gas industry, working at plants and properties in the general area. In March 2020, he was laid off and was collecting Employment Insurance benefits. Ms. Foord was a cook by vocation and worked, at least part time, at a pub in Taylor. 

The evidence indicates that they were both using drugs and drinking to a significant extent during their relationship. 
 
In terms of the actual events giving rise to the charges, I will summarize from the statement of admissions: 

• During the early morning hours of July 7, 2020, at the residence in Taylor, Mr. Keyler wounded Ms. Foord by stabbing her with the blade of a multitool. 
• On July 7, 2020, Mr. Keyler transported the body of Ms. Foord, together with various other items taken from the residence, to a gas well-site location near Buick Creek, British Columbia, where he buried her body in the bush adjacent to the cleared portion of the well-site, and left the other items in the bush nearby. 
• After burying the body of Ms. Foord, Mr. Keyler went to a small body of water a short distance away and threw the multitool with which he had stabbed her into the water. 
• On July 21, 2020, Mr. Keyler made a non-custodial warned and recorded statement to members of the RCMP in which he confessed to committing the stabbing of Ms. Foord and to transporting and burying her body; he voluntarily directed and accompanied police to where he had buried her body.
• On July 24, 2020, Ms. Foord's body was exhumed and photographed by the police, and then removed to Vernon Jubilee Hospital where it was held for autopsy. 
• On July 25, 2020, after being charged with and arrested for the murder of Ms. Foord, Mr. Keyler made a further statement to police, again confessing to having committed the stabbing of Ms. Foord and transporting her body and burying it at the well-site. 
• An autopsy was conducted on July 29, 2020, by Dr. Jason Doyle. That process included drawing blood samples which were submitted for analysis to the RCMP National Forensic Laboratory. 
• On July 29, 2020, RCMP divers searched the water where Mr. Keyler said he had thrown the multitool; police recovered the multitool and seized it. 
• Forensic examination identified the DNA of Ms. Foord on the multitool.
 
The laboratory analysis of Ms. Foord's blood detected the presence of cocaine, together with chemical metabolites which are associated to cocaine. As well, the prescription opioid methadone was found to be present in her blood. 
 
No evidence of the scene of the stabbing was adduced at trial. Based upon the statements and testimony of Mr. Keyler, I conclude that there was a significant bloodletting event in the bathroom of the trailer, that the toilet seat was broken, and that some shelving units from that room were displaced and knocked to the floor in the course of events there. 
 
The autopsy findings are set out in Dr. Doyle's report. Stated summarily, he found that Ms. Foord had suffered multiple sharp force injuries (approximately 50), predominantly to the right side of her body, including injuries to the right side of the face, neck, chest, abdomen, and right shoulder, and to both hands and arms. Many of the injuries he found were described as very superficial and did not result in any significant underlying injury. However, two stab wounds of particular significance were identified: these two stab wounds, to the right side of the torso, penetrated the right hemithorax (right chest cavity), resulting in a 400 millilitre hemothorax (blood in the right chest cavity), secondary predominantly to injury to the ninth intercostal vessels (under the ninth rib). He also noted blunt force trauma evidenced by a hemorrhage resulting in a black eye, but without underlying fractures. In conclusion, Dr. Doyle found the cause of death to be multiple stab wounds, with the two wounds that penetrated the right hemithorax as the most significant, and accounting for death. 

Defence Evidence
 
As noted, Mr. Keyler adduced the evidence of four witnesses and testified himself. 
 
In his testimony, Mr. Keyler described an event which occurred in September 2019. He said that he and Ms. Foord were hunting in a rural area around Fort St. John. He said they were drinking and using drugs; he described that he became upset and worried that individuals had been following them and were going to do harm to them. He also testified to the effect that his perception of those events was that Ms. Foord was somehow complicit in what was occurring and had “set him up”. 
 
Two of the defence witnesses spoke to that event. One of the witnesses was a man on and near whose property these events occurred; he described Mr. Keyler having come to his place, seeking help. The second witness to this event was a police officer who had attended in response to a call. She described her observations of the circumstances and the state of Mr. Keyler. 
 
Mr. Keyler also called two witnesses who were qualified to give opinion evidence. The first of these was Mr. W.K. Jeffery, a toxicologist, who testified particularly with respect to cocaine and its effect on persons who use it. He also spoke briefly as to the drug methadone. 
 
The second expert witness called by the defence was Dr. Andrew Kolchak, whose specialty is forensic psychiatry. Dr. Kolchak conducted an extensive investigation of the circumstances, and his comprehensive report was filed as an exhibit at trial. In addition, he was cross-examined at some length by Crown counsel. 
Positions of the Parties The Crown
 
Crown counsel submits that the evidence discloses a protracted, sustained and deliberate attack committed by Mr. Keyler on Ms. Foord. It is the position of the Crown that the extensive nature of the attack and the repeated thrusts of the weapon are highly probative of a persistent and specific intent to kill. The Crown says that the only reasonable inference to be drawn is that “Mr. Keyler either:

a) inflicted, over such a protracted period of time, injuries of such number and magnitude – and directed to such vital regions of the body, specifically the head and abdomen – that his intent to cause the death of Ms. Foord is manifest; or
b) intentionally inflicted so many injuries to Ms. Foord of such a kind and gravity that Mr. Keyler knew there was a substantial probability that the nature, magnitude and number of injuries would cause Ms. Foord's death and proceeded reckless of the actual consequences”.
 
The Crown says that, to the extent Mr. Jeffery offered the conclusion that Mr. Keyler was in a state of cocaine intoxication, he has overstated the matter. The most Mr. Jeffery can say, contends the prosecutor, is that Mr. Keyler may have been intoxicated at some point after having consumed drugs and alcohol. 
 
The Crown says that Mr. Keyler is not a particularly credible witness, and that his assertion that he does not remember inflicting all of the stab wounds to Ms. Foord, or that he does not know what intent he had, does not provide an answer with respect to the ultimate issue of intent. The Crown submits that there are a number of credibility problems arising from Mr. Keyler's evidence.
 
The essence of the Crown’s position is that there can be no doubt that Mr. Keyler stabbed Ms. Foord approximately 50 times, that the evidence strongly suggests that there was a fight between the two principals in the bathroom, and that the reality is that there was significant animus borne by Mr. Keyler to Ms. Foord. 
 
In all the circumstances, the Crown submits that Mr. Keyler's intent when he inflicted the wounds upon Ms. Foord is compellingly made out by the totality of the circumstances, and that this Court should find that intent to murder has been proven. 
 
With respect to the matter of the indignity to human remains, neither Crown nor defence made submissions on this issue. Essentially, the defence concedes liability with respect to Count Two and accepts that the charge is proven. 

The Defence
 
Mr. Keyler's submissions are focused upon the issue of proof of intent. Mr. Keyler contends that he was in a state of significant intoxication by alcohol and drugs, such that it would be improper for this Court to examine the issue through the so called common sense inference.
 
Instead, Mr. Keyler submits that, based upon his own testimony and that of Dr. Kolchak, there is another reasonable inference to be drawn, namely that Mr. Keyler was in a psychotic state due to substance induced psychosis at the time of the events. In support of this proposition, Mr. Keyler points to a number of observations and findings by Dr. Kolchak, including that:
 
a) Based upon Mr. Keyler’s self-report, he was at the material time likely intoxicated with stimulant(s) and alcohol; 
b) Mr. Keyler, on the basis of his reported persecutory beliefs, manifested by suspiciousness and misinterpreting his environment as threatening, likely qualifies for a diagnosis of Stimulant Induced Psychotic Disorder; and
c) it is possible that Mr. Keyler at the material time developed at least some symptoms of psychosis (to an unknown degree) and therefore qualifies for a diagnosis of Substance Induced Psychotic Disorder. 
 
Mr. Keyler emphasizes two propositions for the Court to bear in mind in the course of its analysis: that the post-offence conduct (that is, the disposal of Ms. Foord's remains) is not an appropriate basis from which to infer intent as required for the charge of murder; and that Mr. Keyler’s criminal record, as adduced in the course of his cross-examination, cannot be used by the Court to infer bad character or propensity to commit criminal offences.

Analysis and Discussion
 
At the outset, it is important to make clear that, in light of Mr. Keyler’s concession that the second count is proven, my comments will focus on the issues raised by Count One, the charge of murder. However, I will deal briefly and summarily with the second count before proceeding to the more contentious matters.
 
The Crown alleges that, contrary to s. 182(b) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 [Code], the accused offered an indignity to the human remains of Ms. Foord by placing her body in a garbage can, transporting it to a remote site and then burying her in a shallow grave.
 
In order to prove the accused guilty of this offence, the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt the following essential elements, in addition to date and place: 

(a) the accused knew that Ms. Foord was dead;
(b) the accused interfered with Ms. Foord’s human remains;
(c) the interference was improper or indecent; and
(d) the accused intended to improperly or indecently interfere with her remains: R. v. Caissie, 2019 SKQB 3 at para. 121, aff’d 2022 SKCA 48. 
 
In addition to the defence concession, I find those elements are made out by the evidence.
 
With that issue addressed, I turn now to the points of dispute in this case. 

Applicable Legal Principles and Concepts
 
There are three particular legal principles that have application to the deliberation process for this indictment. One is comprised of the broad and overarching principles that are foundational to our criminal trial process. Another is of central importance to this case because it prescribes the manner in which a trial court must deal with circumstantial evidence. The latter is especially critical here because the Crown’s case against Mr. Keyler, as it pertains to the issue of intent, is essentially circumstantial. The third pertains to how the Court must deal with the statements and testimony of the accused.
 
Following that, I will set out the specific legal principles that apply in respect of the charge of murder.

Fundamental Principles
 
I commence with a statement of principles that will guide this Court's deliberation and that must be applied in the determination of verdict. Those are as follows: 

a) The defendant is presumed to be innocent unless and until this Court is satisfied that the Crown has proven his guilt to the standard of proof beyond a reasonable doubt;
b) The onus of proof lies upon the Crown; there is no obligation on the defendant to call evidence or to prove anything; and
c) The criminal standard of proof beyond a reasonable doubt will apply in respect of each element of the offence charged or any included offence. Any doubt on any element must be resolved in favour of the defendant. Unless the Crown proves all of the essential elements of the offence charged or any included offence, a verdict of “not guilty” must result. 

Circumstantial Evidence
 
Where the evidence in a case is circumstantial, the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused’s guilt is the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence as a whole: R. v. Villaroman, 2016 SCC 33 at para. 35. If there are reasonable explanations other than guilt, the Crown has not met the burden of proof: Villaroman at para. 35. 
 
While the trier of fact must consider other “plausible theories” and “reasonable possibilities” inconsistent with guilt, this applies to the extent that these alternative theories are not speculative, and are “based on logic and experience applied to the evidence or absence of evidence”: Villaroman at para. 37. 
 
The burden of proof placed on the Crown does not require proof beyond a reasonable doubt of every individual piece of circumstantial evidence: R v. Collin, 2008 BCCA 431 at para. 17. Rather, circumstantial evidence must be examined in its totality, assessing the cumulative effect of all the evidence to determine whether the essential elements have been proven: Cote v. The King, (1941) 1941 CanLII 348 (SCC), 77 C.C.C. 75 (S.C.C.), at para. 3.
 
When faced with circumstantial evidence, the core question posed to the trier is whether the evidence, “viewed logically and in light of human experience, is reasonably capable of supporting an inference other than [guilt]”: Villaroman at para. 38. 

Statements of the Defendant
 
One other criminal law rule to be applied concerns statements made by an accused person.
 
A fundamental feature of the criminal trial process, and one which is essentially related to the principle of reasonable doubt, has to do with the manner in which a trial court will treat such statements. The approach is often referred to as an application of the rule in R. v. W.(D.), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 742.

A practical formulation of the principle is as follows: 

• If, as the trier of fact, I believe the evidence of the accused, denying responsibility for the offence, I must acquit. 
• If I do not believe the evidence of the accused, denying responsibility for the offence, but I am left with a reasonable doubt by it, I must acquit. 
• Even if I do not believe the evidence of the accused, denying responsibility for the offence, I must still ask whether, on the basis of the evidence which I do accept, I am convinced beyond a reasonable doubt by that evidence of the guilt of the accused. 
• There has come to be a fourth aspect of the approach, which I include in my frame of analysis and consider applicable: if, after a careful consideration of all of the evidence, I am unable to decide whom to believe, the defendant must be acquitted.

In the matter at bar, the defendant has testified at trial and there are a number of statements in evidence that he made, either denying or standing at variance with his guilt in respect of Count One. 

I acknowledge that any statement made by the defendant must be treated in this fashion, and, in my analysis, I will make further reference to that. The Law

The definition of murder in the Code, as relevant to the matter at hand, is set out in s. 229(a): 

229 Culpable homicide is murder 
(a) where the person who causes the death of a human being
(i) means to cause his death, or
(ii) means to cause him bodily harm that he knows is likely to cause his death, and is reckless whether death ensues or not;
 
In order for the Crown to prove the murder charge against the defendant, it must satisfy the Court, beyond a reasonable doubt, of two principal elements:

(1) That the defendant unlawfully caused the death of the victim, (the actus reus); and
(2) that, at the time the defendant acted to cause the death: he either meant to cause the death of the victim or he meant to cause the victim bodily harm that he knew was likely to cause death, and was reckless as to whether death ensued or not (the mens rea). 

In these reasons, I may sometimes refer to the latter element as the requisite murderous intent, even though the word intent is not used in the Code provision. 

Also relevant to this case is the offence of unlawful act manslaughter, an offence not expressly defined in the Code. For practical purposes, it is a residual category of unlawful killing: an unlawful killing that is neither murder nor infanticide. Essentially, to prove guilt of manslaughter the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt two elements: that the accused caused the death of the victim and that the accused caused that death unlawfully. That second element of the offence is proven where the death is caused by an unlawful and dangerous act. An unlawful act is an act that is an offence under the law. With respect to the requirement that the act be dangerous, that is established if a reasonable person in the same circumstances would realize that the unlawful act would likely put another person at risk of bodily harm. Bodily harm means any hurt or injury that interferes with another person's health or comfort in something more than a brief or minor way. It is not necessary that the prosecution prove that a reasonable person would realize that the unlawful act would likely cause the death of that other person. 

The difference between the two offences is that murder requires the Crown to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant had the specific murderous intent as defined. 

Proof of unlawful act manslaughter does not require that the defendant intended or meant to cause the death of the victim. It is sufficient that the Crown establish the general intent required for the unlawful act. 

I make reference to the offence of manslaughter because, in the circumstances of the present case, it is a lesser included offence of the murder charge alleged against the defendant and it is relevant in the context of the defence submissions. 

For both murder and manslaughter, causation means that the defendant’s conduct contributed significantly to the death of the deceased.
 
To secure a conviction for murder, the Crown must prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the defendant had either a subjective intent to cause Ms. Foord's death or that he intended to cause bodily harm knowing it likely would result in death and was reckless as to whether death ensued. In the matter at bar, the more plausible path to liability, as I understand it, is the second branch. The Crown says that, on the basis of the particular facts, the Court should infer the necessary intent.

Where the issue of intent involves intoxication, as in this case, a helpful starting point is the following excerpt from R. v. Florence, 2014 BCCA 288:

… the leading case on intoxication as it applies to the specific intent for murder is R. v. Daley, 2007 SCC 53.

In Daley, the Court set out the three legally relevant levels of intoxication. On the one end, there is “mild” intoxication which cannot negate specific intent, and on the other end, there is extreme intoxication, where the accused is so intoxicated that he or she is incapable of forming specific intent. Extreme intoxication is akin to automatism.
 
The middle category of “advanced” intoxication is relevant here. This occurs “where there is intoxication to the point where the accused lacks specific intent, to the extent of an impairment of the accused’s foresight of the consequences of his or her act sufficient to raise a reasonable doubt about the requisite mens rea”: Daley at para. 41. In other words, the intoxication defence recognizes that alcohol may impair both one’s ability to act with intention or foresee the consequences of one’s actions. Evidence that an accused had been consuming alcohol may prevent the Crown from relying on the common sense inference that a sane and sober person intends the probable consequences of his or her actions.
 
However, the extent of intoxication required to negate specific intent may vary, depending on the type of offence involved. As stated in Daley at para. 42, “for certain types of homicides, where death is the obvious consequence of the accused’s act, an accused might have to establish a particularly advanced degree of intoxication to successfully avail himself or herself of an intoxication defence of this type.”
 
In some circumstances, the trier of fact may apply the common sense inference: that a sane and sober person intends the natural consequences of his actions. This, it should be noted, is a route of analysis that the trier of fact may (that is, permissive) apply; the trier is not obliged to apply it, and the concept is not properly described as a presumption.
 
The proposition is simple but powerful. In most instances of human conduct, the notion that one intends the natural and logically predictable outcomes of one’s deliberate actions is quite compelling. However, the applicability of the “rule” is not without limitations.

There is one final observation I make with respect to the legal principles that this case presents. In the submissions provided by the Crown, at para. 25, in support of its contention that the Court should find the murder charge proven, and with reference to the matter of the defendant’s intoxication, the prosecutor says this: In any event, the law in Canada is that intoxication short of automatism is not a defence to the kind of violent crime at issue here: R. v. Brown [2022 SCC 18], para. 5, per Kasirer, J. 

With great respect, I cannot agree that is legally, fully correct so as to have application to the murder charge. In Brown, the offence that the Supreme Court of Canada was considering – to which Justice Kasirer was referring – was aggravated assault, which is a general, not specific, intent offence. I suggest the distinction is made apparent in the sentence which follows the excerpt at para. 5: The outcome of the constitutional questions in these appeals has no impact on the rule that intoxication short of automatism is not a defence to violent crimes of general intent in this country. 

My understanding is that, as explained in the excerpt from Florence quoted above, when there is intoxication to the point where the accused lacks specific intent to the extent of an impairment of the accused’s foresight of the consequences of his or her act sufficient to raise a reasonable doubt about the requisite mens rea, that may give rise to an intoxication defence to a specific intent offence but not a general intent offence.
 
In the case at bar, such a defence could be available for the murder charge but not for the included offence of manslaughter, a general intent offence.
 
Analysis

Preliminary Comments
 
I propose now to examine the central issue that this case presents: has the Crown established that, when Mr. Keyler stabbed and killed Ms. Foord, he had the intent necessary to prove that the act was murder, or does the proof of that element fall short of the requisite high standard, such that a conviction for manslaughter must be the result?
 
To provide a more specific context for that issue, it may be helpful to set out the position urged upon the Court by Mr. Keyler. He says that there is a real doubt about the proof of specific intent because there is a body of evidence tending to suggest the defendant, on account of his level of intoxication by alcohol and stimulant drugs (principally cocaine), was in a state of mind akin to a psychotic condition that clouded his thinking to the extent there is a reasonable doubt that he actually formed the specific intent necessary for murder.
 
Before delving into the analysis, I wish to make a number of points. The first is that, in my discussion, I will make reference to the defendant’s state of mind. By that, I refer, somewhat compendiously, to his mindset generally, as well as the effects of substances (both alcohol and drugs – essentially degree of intoxication) in terms of not only commonplace criteria, such as impact upon judgement and disinhibition, but also more aberrant cognitive function, such as psychosis, which I understand to entail a difficulty in distinguishing between what is real and what is not real. 
 
An individual under the influence of substances may act out in ways that are violent, angry and destructive because of diminished judgement and/or inhibition, but it does not follow that there is a reasonable doubt about that person’s intent to take certain action. Where there is a viable basis to find a state of active psychosis, the conclusion may be different. Obviously, critical considerations are the temporal connection between the state of mind and the actual event at issue and the apparent effect that the state of mind had upon the action taken. The focus must be with respect to the state of mind at the relevant time – not at large – and there must be reason to conclude there is an actual connection between the state of mind and the action taken.
 
A second and related observation to be made is this: while there is evidence before this Court, most notably from Dr. Kolchak and, to a lesser extent, from Mr. Jeffery, about the effects of drugs, primarily cocaine although also, in a limited way, to alcohol, those opinions are, to some substantial degree, general and theoretical. They describe known effects of intoxication by those substances – what conditions are typically or sometimes observed related to use. Dr. Kolchak’s evidence purports to provide a somewhat greater degree of insight into Mr. Keyler’s state of mind. That aspect of his opinion is quite significantly informed by his interviews with Mr. Keyler, and so the Court’s assessment of Dr. Kolchak’s opinion is necessarily impacted by the recognition that what Mr. Keyler told Dr. Kolchak may not be entirely reliable or consistent with what he has said and done on other occasions. Caution is thus warranted. However, in the final analysis, while I must certainly consider the evidence of those two witnesses, neither has the ability to speak definitively to the issue I am concerned with, Mr. Keyler’s state of mind at the time of the stabbings.
 
A third point is that, although Mr. Keyler, in his trial testimony, seems to “hedge his bet” to some degree in that he does not fully and unqualifiedly admit that he caused all the injuries to Ms. Foord, I have no reservations in that regard. I am satisfied that there is no other reasonable conclusion but that he inflicted all the stab injuries, both the more superficial ones and the two that have been identified as life-threatening and which, I find, caused her death. That he says he has no memory of causing all the wounds – claiming a blackout, if you will – certainly standing alone and without more, does not absolve him of responsibility for those actions.
 
A final point to be made is that this is not a case where the issue of non-insane automatism – referred to above in Florence at para. 20, as “extreme intoxication akin to automatism” – is posed as a possible outcome. Both the Crown and Mr. Keyler are ad idem on that and, in my view, properly so.
 
Evidence bearing on the intent issue 
 
The evidence of primary relevance on this issue is comprised of the defendant's trial testimony and the statements he made to the police and which have been tendered by the Crown, and the evidence of two defence witnesses, Mr. Jeffrey and Dr. Kolchak. I consider Mr. Keyler’s evidence to be of central importance to the determination. As well, as I will explain, the reports and testimony of Mr. Jeffery and Dr. Kolchak have also informed my analysis. 
 
I have examined the evidence of Mr. Keyler carefully and will review it in some detail. I will begin with a general description of his evidence and will make further reference to specific portions later in my analysis. I will also review the evidence of Dr. Kolchak and Mr. Jeffery.

The Evidence of Mr. Keyler
 
Mr. Keyler testified as to his background. He described a fairly uneventful upbringing. He said that he did not begin drinking until his late teens and began to use cocaine a short time later, once he was in the workforce, which I understand to have been around the age of 19. 
 
The defendant met Ms. Foord in early 2019. At the time, Mr. Keyler was primarily employed in the oil and gas drilling industry which was active in the North Peace area. Evidently that work is somewhat seasonal. Within a very short time, the two became involved in a romantic relationship and Mr. Keyler moved into Ms. Foord's residence in Taylor in April or May 2019. 
 
The defendant testified with respect to an event that occurred in September 2019. He said that on September 26, he and Ms. Foord went on a hunting trip. They were driving around, using drugs and drinking. At some point, according to Mr. Keyler, he believed they were being followed. They were in a rural area and ran out of gas. He told of getting out of the vehicle and going to a nearby farmhouse to try and get gas. He also described that the vehicle which he believed was following them contained three or four persons, “brown men”, and he said that he was fearful of them. He stated that Ms. Foord was with him for part of this event and that she acted in a way that caused him to think she was adverse to him. He also testified that he thought he had been stabbed or shot. 
 
In the spring of 2020, Mr. Keyler and Ms. Foord were living at her trailer residence in Taylor. Mr. Keyler testified that he had been laid off from his employment in around March, and that they were subsisting on Employment Insurance benefits, some COVID payments, and the money Ms. Foord was earning working at a bar in Taylor. 
 
With respect to this time, and particularly drug use, the defendant initially testified that he and Ms. Foord were “using and drinking occasionally”. In fact, as his testimony advanced, he explained that he was using cocaine and alcohol as a sort of “balance” and also using methadone powder to calm his anxiety. He described that their combined use was in the range of 3 to 5 grams per day (cocaine) and that they also used alcohol fairly heavily. In addition, he said they were using marijuana occasionally and also using crystal methamphetamine.
 
Mr. Keyler described what I understood to be a pattern of increasing drug use. He said that by early July, they were using “lots”, bingeing and sleeping erratically. More generally, he indicated that, with respect to the relationship between himself and Ms. Foord, it was a stressful time. He said there were money issues, and dissension in their relationship with respect to her circle of friends, particularly a man named Cody Powell. Mr. Keyler testified that he felt these other persons were playing too large a role in their (his and Ms. Foord's) life as a couple, and he had a feeling that Mr. Powell particularly was trying to split them up. In describing the state of their relationship (his and Ms. Foord’s), he used the word dysfunctional. 
 
Mr. Keyler testified in some detail respecting the events of July 6; he related that he and Ms. Foord bought liquor that day, some 24 Budweiser beer and a 24 pack of coolers as well as a 26 ounce bottle of vodka. He also said that in the afternoon, he and Ms. Foord travelled to the nearby community of Charlie Lake where they purchased cocaine from their dealer: they bought 5 grams, for $300 or $400 and also 2.5 grams of methadone. He later clarified that this purchase had been “on cuff”, that the dealer had allowed them credit and they would pay later.
 
The defendant said that he and Ms. Foord were using the drugs and consuming alcohol through the day. He said by midnight, they had run out of drugs and had gone back to Charlie Lake to purchase a further 4 to 5 grams of cocaine and they also got one further gram of methadone. Evidently they were able to access funds at a bank machine after midnight, and so were able to pay the dealer.
 
He testified that they had returned to their trailer by approximately 1:00 a.m. and that the drinking and drug use continued. He also said that in the course of this time, that is late on July 6, and into the early morning of July 7, they received some text messages from Mr. Powell. That was a source of conflict between the two. He said they were arguing and yelling at each other. 
 
After their return, around 1:00 a.m., he said that they were “chilling” in the bathroom, by which I understand him to mean they were in the bathroom using drugs. Mr. Keyler said that he began to feel uncomfortable: he said he was feeling nauseous and felt “cornered”. 
 
His testimony is that, while in the bathroom, he had taken the contents of his pockets and some of the drugs and put those items on the counter adjacent to the basin. Among the items that he had placed there was his Leatherman multitool which he said he usually carried with him. 
 
The defendant said that they had been listening to music. He testified that after the music stopped, he began to hear things and thought something was “going on”. Specifically, he thought there were people in or under the house. He claims he heard noises that were “like people crawling under the house”. 
 
Mr. Keyler said that, in his state of mind, he wanted Ms. Foord to come closer to him, to take his hand. He testified that he had taken the Leatherman and extended the blade and was carrying it in his right hand to “protect himself”. He also testified that he thought Ms. Foord had “set him up" and that she wanted to get somebody to kill him. His testimony is that, while both of them were in the bathroom, and he was standing nearest the tub, he pulled her towards him. He said she resisted and called him a “piece of shit”. He persisted in physically trying to draw her near – he grabbed her and pulled her into the tub with him. He also described that he pulled down the shower curtain to “cover us, hide us” from persons that he thought were trying to get into the bathroom. He explained his reasoning as essentially this: if Ms. Foord was with him, he would feel protected. The defendant said that he was seeing things, specifically that he saw a lion after shutting off the light. He also testified that there was a shaving cream bottle in the shower and that he saw a camera lens on it. 
 
Mr. Keyler described the struggle as he pulled Ms. Foord into the tub. He said he remembered holding and hugging her and stabbing her, poking her in the back a few times. When asked why he did that, he said he did not know and did not want to, other than that he was trying to protect himself; he felt that if she was near, nothing would happen to him. He said he thought she had set him up and that people were going to kill him. 
 
Mr. Keyler said that he then blacked out. His next memory was waking up in the tub; it was half full of water and he was trying to get the shower curtain off himself. He said Ms. Foord was on the floor, on her back, with her foot resting on the edge of the tub. He described that the taps were running. He said he did not turn them on and does not know who did. 
 
Mr. Keyler testified that his last recollection of these events before he woke up was sometime between 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. He said he woke up the following morning between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. in the tub. Ms. Foord was on the floor; he tried to wake her but she was not responsive. He went into the bedroom to have a cigarette. He changed his clothes and snorted some cocaine and said he came to realize that Ms. Foord was dead. After a time, he retrieved a garbage can from outside and put her body in it, then put it in his truck. He testified that he wiped down the bathroom with towels. His description was that there was a lot of blood on the bathroom walls, and that he found a broken toilet seat and also saw that a rack in the bathroom had been pulled down. 
 
 Mr. Keyler testified that he subsequently drove his truck to an oil and gas lease site in the area of Buick Creek. He said he pulled into the clearing and left the garbage can with Ms. Foord's remains there, near some trees. He then described returning to town, buying gas, cigarettes and cocaine, then going to the residence in Taylor where he got some clothes, some personal items and a shovel. He returned to the lease site, to where the garbage can was located. He testified that he dug a hole and placed Ms. Foord's remains in there. 
 
 Mr. Keyler was quite adamant in his testimony that he saw no stab wounds on Ms. Foord's body in the morning and that he observed no blood on her nor wounds to her hands or her face. He did testify that there was blood on the bathroom wall but he attributes that to a cut on his own hand. 
 
 Mr. Keyler testified as to the details of leaving the body in the shallow grave, disposing of certain items including his Leatherman and the shovel and how he eventually left the Peace area and travelled by truck to Surrey by way of Alberta. After a number of days in the lower mainland, he returned to the Fort St. John and Dawson Creek area. 
 
 On July 21, he went to the police station in Fort St. John. A noncustodial statement was taken by the investigators. On July 25, he was arrested and provided the police with a second statement. 
 
 At trial, Mr. Keyler was asked why he concealed Ms. Foord's death. His answer was to the effect that the reason was to buy himself some time and, I gather, to come to some acceptance of what had happened. He was asked whether he intended to kill Ms. Foord. He said he did not nor did he intend to cause her bodily harm. His testimony is that at the time of the event, he was very intoxicated. On a scale of 1 to 10, with 10 being a point where one cannot move, he rated himself at 9.5. 
 
 In summary, he said “I was so drunk and high I did not know what was going on.”
 
 The cross-examination was thorough and probing.
 
 In the course of that, it became more clearly apparent that there were serious problems in the relationship between Ms. Foord and the defendant, such that there was open and active hostility between them in the time before she died.
 
 A number of points were developed in the cross-examination, including the fact that the defendant was quite troubled by the presence of Cody Powell in the relationship. Specifically, Mr. Keyler agreed that he had told the police that it might be that events with Ms. Foord were brought to a head by a discussion they had concerning Mr. Powell and Mr. Powell having contacted Mr. Keyler to ask about a pornographic film that the defendant had been watching. Mr. Keyler described Mr. Powell as someone he considered “shady” and agreed with the suggestion of Crown counsel that he suspected Mr. Powell was somehow surveilling him by spying on his (the defendant's) TV. 
The Evidence of Dr. Kolchak 
 
 Dr. Kolchak prepared a thorough and detailed report. It is apparent that he spent considerable time reviewing all of the material that was available to him, and that included accessing a number of interviews with persons who did not testify at trial, as well as a detailed interview of Mr. Keyler. 
 
A number of his material observations are set out below: 

• After providing a fairly thorough description of his personal background, Mr. Keyler described returning to the Fort St. John area in 2019 and meeting Sarah Foord. He described that they became involved in a relationship and that the lifestyle of that relationship was substantially one of drinking alcohol and using drugs, particularly cocaine and some crystal methamphetamine (according to his telling, that was particularly a drug of choice for Ms. Foord).
• Mr. Keyler said that cocaine had a calming effect for him and caused him to be relaxed and countered his feelings of anxiety. He self-reported that he was prone to experiencing anxiety, some situational depression and paranoia. 
• Generally, Mr. Keyler reported to Dr. Kolchak that his relationship with Sarah Foord was “good”. 
• Mr. Keyler described an incident that occurred in September 2019, when he and Ms. Foord were hunting. He said that he thought people were after him and that Ms. Foord was “setting him up”. He also described feeling jealousy with respect to her friend Cody Powell. 
• Mr. Keyler reported that he experienced heightened anxiety and paranoia from time to time, but denied any hallucinations. Mr. Keyler specifically said that he was concerned that other persons were spying on him and as something of a consequence, he began to carry a Leatherman knife. He also described that he experienced sleep difficulties when he was using cocaine and alcohol. 
• Mr. Keyler said that in the early summer of 2020, both he and Ms. Foord were using cocaine on an increasing basis. 
• With respect to the actual stabbing event, Mr. Keyler said that he and Ms. Foord had been drinking and using crystal methamphetamine; he said that had been going on for a few days. He said that they bought drugs when their checks cleared and he estimated that, on the day of the stabbing (and, as I understand, in the time shortly preceding), they spent some $800 on drugs, namely cocaine and methadone. He reported that they were using drugs in the bathroom of the home; he described feeling paranoid and agitated. He said he had his drug gear on the counter and at some point, felt someone was coming in because he heard noises outside. He said he thought something was going to happen to him and so he pulled Ms. Foord into the bathtub with him. He described that there was a struggle, while he had the knife in his hand. Specifically, he told Dr. Kolchak that he thought Ms. Foord was trying to “set him up”. In initial his description to Dr. Kolchak, Mr. Keyler made no mention of stabbing Ms. Foord. Instead, he said he woke up in the morning; he said he was in the tub and the water was running and Ms. Foord was on the floor. Mr. Keyler told Dr. Kolchak that it was the morning, after he awoke, that he remembered that he had been holding Ms. Foord and remembered a stabbing motion while he was holding her in a bear hug. 
• Mr. Keyler said that he spent a couple of hours thinking about this situation. He then brought a garbage can into the trailer, put Ms. Foord in it and then cleaned up the scene. He said that in the morning, he was not fearful for his life. 
• Mr. Keyler said that after a time, he was consuming more drugs and went on the run. 
 
Dr. Kolchak testified that, at the time of his interview and examination of Mr. Keyler, he found Mr. Keyler’s mental state to be quite unremarkable and noted no indication of any psychiatric issues. 
 
Dr. Kolchak concluded that there are four diagnoses that apply, or likely apply, to Mr. Keyler: 
 
1. A Stimulant Use Disorder (cocaine and crystal methamphetamine); he characterizes that disorder as severe, but finds it was in remission at the time of examination (I note that, at the time of the interview, Mr. Keyler was being held in custody, on remand, and had been in that status for approximately two years).
2. An Alcohol Use Disorder, again in remission at the time of the examination.
3. Dr. Kolchak notes that Mr. Keyler reports a history of substance induced psychotic symptoms that occur in circumstances of prolonged and more extreme intoxication. Evidently, those disappear when Mr. Keyler is not using stimulant drugs or alcohol. Dr. Kolchak notes that Mr. Keyler says he develops persecutory beliefs, suspiciousness and misinterprets his environment as threatening while he is intoxicated, especially for protracted periods of time (several hours or more). Dr. Kolchak found no evidence of non-substance induced psychotic disorder, and he therefore concluded that Mr. Keyler likely qualifies for a diagnosis of Stimulant Induced Psychotic Disorder. 
[Emphasis added.]
4. Dr. Kolchak also concludes that Mr. Keyler qualifies for a diagnosis of Antisocial Personality Disorder.
 
Dr. Kolchak was invited to offer his opinion with respect to the possible presence of mental disorder at the time of the offence. He concluded, based upon his interviews with the defendant, that on a balance of probabilities, it is likely that Mr. Keyler was intoxicated with stimulants such as crystal methamphetamine and alcohol at the time of the offence, and therefore qualified for a diagnosis of Stimulant Intoxication and Alcohol Intoxication.

Dr. Kolchak also opined that, based upon Mr. Keyler’s report that he had experienced what appeared to be symptoms of psychosis which manifested with paranoia and feelings that his life was in danger some time around the offence, and particularly his claim that he heard sounds and was suspicious that Sarah Foord was potentially somehow involved with “perceived perpetrators”, and given that stimulants and crystal methamphetamine are well known to cause psychosis both during the time of intoxication and even beyond the period of intoxication, it is “possible, on Mr. Keyler's report, that he developed at least some symptoms of psychosis (to an unknown degree) and therefore qualified for the presence of Substance Induced Psychotic Disorder at the material time”. Dr. Kolchak considers it unlikely that Mr. Keyler was suffering from any psychotic illness independent of the substance abuse intoxication.

Dr. Kolchak also offered what he described as an alternative hypothesis. That hypothesis includes the fact that Mr. Keyler is known to be struggling with anger and control while managing his intimate relationships, that he has clear antisocial traits that contribute to violent behaviour, and that there was a long-standing conflict between Mr. Keyler and Ms. Foord founded in jealousy; accordingly, it is possible that the defendant was angry and subsequently violent toward Ms. Foord outside his reported psychotic experiences. In other words, one available alternative to consider is that what occurred was based on domestically related violence.

Finally, Dr. Kolchak offered the view that “it is also possible that Mr. Keyler's actions at the time of the offence were driven by a combination of triggers combined from both hypotheses described.” 

Dr. Kolchak was also invited to opine on the question of whether Mr. Keyler was aware of his actions at the time and his ability to form intent. 

The first of these issues is a matter that I consider that Dr. Kolchak may opine upon; the second is certainly, in part at least, a legal issue and I do not consider it to be appropriate for his opinion to be considered as determinative. 

With respect to the former, Dr. Kolchak stated that he considered it more likely than not that Mr. Keyler was aware of his actions and his environment at the time, independent of whether he was interpreting it correctly or in the context of psychosis. 

He offered no opinion as to whether Mr. Keyler appreciated the consequences of his actions. Finally, I observed that Dr. Kolchak notes, quite appropriately, that much of the history upon which he relies was as provided by the defendant and was not supported by independent corroborative information. 

I wish to make certain observations with respect to the evidence of Dr. Kolchak.

In the course of preparing his report, he took into account information from a number of collateral sources, including statements that the police obtained in their investigation from persons who knew the defendant and Ms. Foord. In his report, Dr. Kolchak referred to that information. Some of it reflects badly on the character and history of Mr. Keyler. Specifically, some of those witnesses describe what they claim to have observed and concluded about the relationship.

The concern is that none of those persons testified at trial; in fact, I am not certain that they would have been permitted to give that type of evidence if they had been called to the stand.

This is not intended as a criticism of Dr. Kolchak or trial counsel. It is a reasonable expectation that Dr. Kolchak will take his obligation as an expert witness seriously and do his best to take into account information he reasonably considers to be relevant. In fact, I was favourably impressed by Dr. Kolchak. I conclude that he did his best to be fair and even-handed in formulating his opinions and providing his evidence.

The point I make is this: I am cognizant of the concern that evidence of this type can cause trial unfairness and I have taken care to disregard the particular statements he referenced in his report in order to ensure that evidence prejudicial to the defendant is not improperly considered in my deliberations.

The Evidence of Mr. Jeffery

The Court also received the evidence of Mr. Jeffery. On the basis of his experience and training, he has a substantial expertise in the field of toxicology and he was qualified to testify as to his opinions.

Based upon the information with which he had been provided, and particularly the proposition that Mr. Keyler had been using high doses of cocaine and methadone in the days preceding, and on the day of, the incident, he expressed his opinion that Mr. Keyler was, at the relevant time, “intoxicated by cocaine”. As to the effects of that cocaine, particularly with respect to the possibility that there was a psychotic reaction, Mr. Jeffery simply notes that the effects of cocaine ingestion proceed as a continuum and he does not consider himself qualified to comment on the possibility that Mr. Keyler was in a state of cocaine psychosis.

Mr. Jeffery provided evidence with respect to a number of issues related to cocaine and cocaine abuse: 

• Cocaine is a popular drug of abuse because of its ability to rapidly produce an intense euphoria. It is a potent central nervous stimulant. 
• The effects of cocaine are directly related to the amount of cocaine administered and the method in which it is taken.
• The effects of short-term low-dose cocaine on the Central Nervous System
are euphoria, alertness, a sense of well-being with excitement and a rapid flow of thoughts, postponement of physical and mental fatigue, decreased appetite, increased self-confidence, excitement, heightened alertness, talkativeness, increased speed of performance with hyperactivity, and decreased accuracy. 
• The effects of short-term high-dose use are agitation, anxiety, a feeling of grandeur, paranoia, hallucinations, acute psychotic reactions, rapid flight of ideas, feeling of grandiosity, bouts of seemingly meaningless behaviour, panic reactions and possibly paranoid psychosis.
• The effects of long-term usage include panic attacks, various psychiatric problems, lack of concentration, dramatic mood swings, hypersensitivity to sensory stimuli, visual and auditory hallucination, sleep disorders, sexual dysfunction, and other physical conditions. 
• There is an observed link between cocaine use/abuse and violence. Specifically, it has been associated with anger, aggressiveness, hallucinations, delusions and other psychotic symptoms. 
• Cocaine intoxication is characterized by a number of symptoms, including hallucinations (auditory, visual and tactile), paranoia, possible confusion and possible bizarre and/or aggressive behaviour. 
• Cocaine psychosis is characterized by persecutory delusions, paranoia, hallucinations, extreme agitation, unpredictable, inappropriate and aggressive behaviour. Mr. Jeffery notes that an important distinctive feature about cocaine psychosis is that it does not disappear with the disappearance of the drug from the body and the symptoms may remain long after cocaine is metabolized; studies have found that the average duration of the psychotic episode was 16 days with a range of 1 to 60 days. 
• The effects of cocaine proceed on a continuum from euphoria, to dysphoria, paranoia, hallucinations to psychosis. The development and rate of progression of the stages is affected by prior mental disorders, frequency and method of use, and dose.

Finally, Mr. Jeffery offered some comments with respect to methadone. He described that it is classified as a synthetic narcotic analgesic and that it is abused recreationally for its sedative and analgesic effects. Generally, as he describes the impact of methadone usage, it would seem that the general effect is one of lessening anxiety and aggressiveness; it manifests more in terms of the sedation or relaxation effect.

In terms of a bottom line conclusion, Mr. Jeffery would only say that it is his opinion that, based upon the information available to him, at the relevant time, Mr. Keyler was “intoxicated by cocaine”. He was not prepared to offer an opinion on the possibility that Mr. Keyler was in the state of cocaine psychosis.

Observations

Before I embark upon my analysis, there are at least two observations to make with respect to the evidence I have just reviewed.

The first is that the principal thrust of the drug evidence is that Mr. Keyler was a heavy user of cocaine and that was the drug he was using at the time of the stabbing. In the evidence, particularly dealing with background, there is also reference to crystal methamphetamine. In the various statements made by Mr. Keyler, he has referred to using crystal methamphetamine in the past, to that drug being one favoured by Ms. Foord, and probably most notably, he told Dr. Kolchak that, “on the night of the offence, the couple was drinking and using crystal meth”. He said they were “using for a few days straight” prior to the day of the offence. That is not consistent with his trial testimony – in court he described using cocaine prior to the offence. He did not mention crystal methamphetamine other than to say they had used it in the past.

That is obviously a discrepancy of at least some note, and I have reflected upon its significance. It does not engender confidence that Mr. Keyler is an especially reliable historian, that is true. Beyond that, I am not convinced it is a critical consideration. I note that the Crown elected not to pursue the point in cross-examination and does not specifically suggest in its submissions that this is an important matter. I recognize that, generally, both cocaine and crystal methamphetamine are somewhat similar in that each is a known stimulant. In Dr. Kolchak’s report, he seems to treat them in a similar way, including both in his reference to Stimulant Use Disorder.

I also note that Mr. Keyler has made reference in his various statements and in his conversations with Dr. Kolchak to his “psychosis”. To be clear, I do not attach any truth value to such self-diagnosis, if that is how this might be described. Any meaningful consideration of the real or possible presence of psychosis or its role in the events, if any, is for the Court to determine, based upon appropriate expert evidence.

Finally, there is the issue of the weight to be attached to the expert opinions. As for Dr. Kolchak, I am satisfied that his opinions as to the proposition that Mr. Keyler qualifies for a diagnosis of Stimulant Use Disorder and Alcohol Use Disorder, both currently in remission, are credible. More relevantly, his opinion that Mr. Keyler likely qualifies for a diagnosis of Stimulant Induced Psychotic Disorder, couched as it is by the qualification that it is “based on the defendant’s reports”, and premised on the condition that such psychosis will manifest during protracted periods of intoxication, is essentially worthy of serious consideration. I accept it as a reasonable possibility.

As for the opinion of Mr. Jeffery, my assessment of his evidence is that he principally provides a general overview of the symptoms and behavioural consequences of heavy use of cocaine as documented in authoritative academic sources. To the extent he relates those behaviours to the defendant, it is clearly premised on the condition that he has been provided with certain information, and his opinions as they relate to Mr. Keyler are thus conditional or hypothetical. I understand that and must of course weigh his evidence accordingly. His opinions concerning methadone are couched as statements that are based on generally accepted scientific and pharmaceutical findings and are not, as I understand them, intended to describe Mr. Keyler or his conduct.

Discussion

With that extensive preamble, I now turn to the analysis of how the evidence is to be interpreted and applied to the issue at bar.

For the Crown to succeed in proving that the defendant committed murder, it must satisfy the Court that when he inflicted the stab wounds, he knew what he was doing and that he intended to inflict those stab wounds with the intention that Ms. Foord would die or that he was inflicting bodily harm that was so serious and dangerous that Ms. Foord would likely die as a result of that bodily harm, and he proceeded nevertheless. That consideration necessarily entails taking into account his state of mind at the time.

Earlier I made reference to the common sense inference. In this case, there is evidence that supports a finding that there was some degree of drug and alcohol intoxication present. Because this precludes the necessary assumption that the defendant was “sane and sober” at the time of the stabbing, I am not satisfied that it is appropriate to apply the common sense inference in this case.

That being so, the Court must consider all of the evidence, direct and circumstantial, that bears upon the issue of intent, and then draw an appropriate inference as to whether or not intent has been established. The question here is whether the Court can be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that, at the time he inflicted the stab wounds to Ms. Foord, the defendant understood what was going on and had a conscious intention to do what he did and was able to foresee the consequences of his actions. In my view, it is the question of whether the defendant understood what was going on that is critical here.

The evidence that bears upon the defendant's intent derives principally from his testimony. While Dr. Kolchak gave evidence that Mr. Keyler warrants diagnoses of severe Stimulant Use Disorder and Alcohol Use Disorder, and, in certain circumstances, may experience Stimulant Induced Psychosis, those are not conditions that are manifesting in conduct on an ongoing or constant basis: they may be active episodically. It bears emphasis that the focus of the Court's examination must be on the actual events and the defendant's state of mind at the time of the offence, not generalized psychiatric opinions of conditions he may be afflicted by. For the altered state of mind condition to raise a reasonable doubt as to intent, there must be a real and functional connection between the state of mind and a fair conclusion that the issue of intent is cast into doubt.

I do not, by any means, find the defendant to be a complete and unqualifiedly credible and reliable witness. He has shortcomings as an historian, and there are a number of inconsistencies between and among some of his tellings, more than minor. I have considered carefully the submissions of the Crown that quite forcefully urge this Court to assign little worth to Mr. Keyler’s evidence. There is undoubtedly merit to those submissions. However, while I have significant reservations as to the truthfulness and reliability of his evidence, I am not able to point to any aspect of his evidence and be satisfied that it is untrue. The parts of his testimony that are of most relevance (his state of intoxication and his state of mind, and the events leading up to the struggle with Ms. Foord in the bathroom and the stabbing itself) are matters regarding which his is the only evidence. As regards the proposition that he was experiencing symptoms akin to some of those associated to cocaine psychosis, while that arises principally from his testimony, I find the evidence of the hunting trip in September 2019 provides some support.

The perspective I must take, it seems to me, is to ask myself whether I reject it as being untrue or whether my scepticism is less absolute. Even though I am not satisfied that what he has said or parts of it are true, is it a situation where I should completely reject it out of hand, or is it such that I cannot say it is not capable of being true, and thus it must be assigned some partial weight in my assessment?

I conclude that, on the matter of Mr. Keyler’s credibility, it is the latter approach I must take.

Accordingly, in keeping with the principle underpinning R. v. W.(D.), I state certain findings of fact that I accept to be reasonably capable of being true: 

• In the weeks prior to the events of July 7, 2020, the defendant and Ms. Foord were drinking fairly heavily and using stimulant drugs (principally cocaine, also, to some extent, crystal methamphetamine) regularly and heavily. They were also using methadone powder from time to time. 
• In the weeks prior to the events of July 7, the defendant and Ms. Foord were experiencing significant conflict and tensions in their relationship stemming from a number of factors, including that the defendant was suspicious and jealous of Ms. Foord’s relationships with some of her longstanding friends. He did not feel that he was well accepted by some of those persons.
• Through the day of July 6, and into the early morning hours of July 7, both the defendant and Ms. Foord were drinking substantial amounts of beer, liquor and alcoholic coolers and were consuming significant amounts of stimulant drugs, primarily cocaine, as well as some methadone powder.
• By the early morning hours of July 7, they were at Ms. Foord’s home in Taylor; they had just resupplied themselves with cocaine and methadone and both were in a state of stimulant intoxication. The defendant was in a state of advanced intoxication.
• The defendant, when he was in a state of advanced intoxication by stimulant, was sometimes subject to experiencing severe mental disturbance in the form of such phenomena as paranoia, a failure to accurately comprehend his environment and circumstances, delusions and hallucinations. 
• Sometime around 1:00 a.m. or later on July 7, the defendant was in the bathroom of Ms. Foord’s home with her. He began to experience mental disruptions that included a belief that persons were in or near the trailer and that they were going to harm him, and that Ms. Foord had some connection to those persons such that she could protect him from them.
• In that state, the defendant, who had armed himself with a sharp-edged implement, a Leatherman tool, forced Ms. Foord to get into the bathtub with him, apparently so she could protect him. She resisted and there was a struggle. In the course of the struggle, the defendant inflicted a significant number of stab wounds to Ms. Foord, resulting in her death.

The Crown is sceptical of the defendant's claims of mental disruption. It takes the position that what occurred is that the defendant was angry, jealous and hostile to Ms. Foord, and he gave vent to those emotions, possibly under the disinhibiting and aggressive effects of some mild intoxication by substance. He lashed out at her with his Leatherman, stabbing her repeatedly in vital areas of her body, such that he must be taken to have realized that the harm he was inflicting was likely to cause her serious bodily harm that could well result in her death, and was completely reckless as to that outcome.

On the other hand, the defendant contends it is reasonable to find that he was in a state of advanced intoxication brought on by having consumed significant quantities of alcohol and stimulant drugs, primarily cocaine; that he perceived that he was going to be attacked by some unknown persons while he was in the bathroom; that he believed that Ms. Foord was somehow part of the threat to him and that grabbing her and holding her near would protect him, and that he stabbed her repeatedly in the fog of that confused and disrupted state of mind.

Dr. Kolchak posited two possible scenarios that are consistent with these two theories. In the first, there was significant psychological disruption that caused the defendant not to have the necessary appreciation of his circumstances and ability to foresee consequences. In the second, Dr. Kolchak accepted that what occurred here may have been intentional and is the result of the defendant’s anger, jealousy and animosity toward Ms. Foord and did not entail a component of psychosis. As well, Dr. Kolchak offered the opinion that this might be a situation where features of both those scenarios contributed to what happened. 

Dr. Kolchak may well be right in that regard. I cannot determine the answer with certainty. 

I am unable to say that either theory is correct or incorrect. Ultimately, I cannot discount the reasonable possibility that the defendant was experiencing effects akin to psychosis arising from his state of cocaine and alcohol intoxication. I therefore have a doubt that he understood the true circumstances as they existed at the time he stabbed Ms. Foord. In accordance with Villaroman, the proposition that Mr. Keyler acted on a distorted perception of reality is a reasonable possibility. It is therefore an alternative to the conclusion the Crown urges; it is, in my view, a reasonably possibility, certainly more than speculative. 

In the result, I conclude that the Crown has not proven beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant had the requisite specific intent for a murder conviction to be entered. 

Conclusion

In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the general intent necessary to find the defendant guilty of unlawful act manslaughter by having committed an assault upon Ms. Foord with a weapon is proven; the specific intent required to prove the charge of murder is not made out. I find Mr. Keyler guilty of manslaughter in respect of the death of Ms. Foord.
 
With respect to Count Two, I find Mr. Keyler guilty of the offence of offering an indignity to the human remains of Ms. Foord. 


./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/sc/2023bcsc92.html

The appellant, Varinder Singh, appeals his conviction for criminal harassment, contrary to s. 264(b) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46. The offence is alleged to have occurred from November 3–December 17, 2019. Following a trial which lasted two days, Judge Senniw convicted Mr. Singh on October 30, 2020. On March 19, 2021, Judge Senniw suspended the passing of sentence, and placed Mr. Singh on probation for two years. Mr. Singh filed a notice of appeal from conviction on April 13, 2021. In that notice of appeal, he seeks to have the conviction set aside, and an acquittal entered.
 


Mr. Singh was self-represented throughout most of these proceedings. It became apparent that his primary ground of appeal was ineffective assistance of counsel, and that Mr. Singh sought to tender fresh evidence in support of that claim. Ms. de Jong was then appointed pursuant to s. 684 of the Criminal Code in a limited capacity, to assist Mr. Singh in advancing that application. I was subsequently appointed as case management judge, pursuant to the practice that has developed in this Court when an issue is raised concerning ineffective assistance of counsel in a summary conviction appeal.
 


Both Ms. de Jong and Ms. Bains, Crown counsel, attended multiple case management conferences and marshalled for the benefit of the court all the required affidavit and other material. The parties then filed written submissions, which each relied on at the time of hearing, without seeking to make any further oral submissions. Mr. Singh appeared at the hearing as well, and advised that he sought to rely on a written submission, previously filed, in addition to that filed on his behalf by Ms. de Jong. Mr. Singh declined the invitation to make any further oral submissions.
 


Consequently, I reserved judgment and stated that I would provide written reasons at a later date. These are those reasons. The Trial Proceedings
 


The Crown called two witnesses at trial, the complainant, Margarita Chapman and Cst. Guo, an RCMP officer who responded to a call made by Ms. Chapman on December 17, 2019, the final time Mr. Singh attended Ms. Chapman’s home uninvited. The defence called no evidence.
 


Ms. Chapman described a brief, somewhat tumultuous relationship between her and Mr. Singh, commencing with some casual meetings in summer 2019, and culminating with a steady dating relationship in September and October 2019. Ms. Chapman said it was an “on and off type of relationship”, which came to an end after an incident on October 28, 2019, in which Mr. Singh took Ms. Chapman’s phone and demanded that she tell him the password. After that date, Ms. Chapman considered the relationship over, and she ceased communicating with Mr. Singh.
 


Mr. Singh thereafter continued to communicate with Ms. Chapman, persistently, via various methods. He called her several times daily, on both cellular and land lines. He sent Ms. Chapman numerous emails, many of which became trial exhibits. Mr. Singh also attended at Ms. Chapman’s home uninvited on several occasions. Ms. Chapman testified that she told Mr. Singh more than once that she did not wish to communicate with him. She took steps to block his telephone calls on one of her telephones. Ms. Chapman did not respond to any of Mr. Singh’s emails.
 


In general, the emails were abusive and highly critical of Ms. Chapman. In some of them, Mr. Singh accused Ms. Chapman of abusing him sexually and emotionally, and stated that she had a narcissistic personality disorder. Mr. Singh also complained about his own mental health challenges in some of the messages, and on at least one occasion said that he was suicidal.
 


Not all of the emails were abusive toward Ms. Chapman. On November 14, 2019, under the subject line “Help my OCD”, Mr. Singh wrote: Let me know simply that you got my messages or emails, else it will trigger my anxiety, my OCD attacks and I will start calling you in a crazy way, which I do not want to do intentionally. Thanks for helping me to get away from you in a peaceful way.
 
 Ms. Chapman did not respond to that email, and Mr. Singh then sent a series of emails on November 15 and 16, 2019, in which he threatened suicide and court action because of what he said was his mistreatment by Ms. Chapman. 
 
 In cross-examination, Ms. Chapman agreed that she became aware toward the end of the relationship of some of Mr. Singh’s mental health issues, that he suffered from depression, obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), and that a nurse visited him daily to give him medication.
 

Ms. Chapman also agreed that she received both an email and text message from Mr. Singh on October 31, 2019, in which he asked her to block his communications. The text message was this: So humbly request with my hands folded to you. I cannot control my anxiety, depression and OCD symptoms just by taking medications regularly. Do it as early as possible so we both can live a peaceful life.
 
 The thrust of the defence submissions at trial was that Mr. Singh’s mental health issues were relevant to the mens rea of the offence, specifically that his mental illness should lead to a reasonable doubt that he knew or was wilfully blind or reckless as to whether Ms. Chapman was harassed by his conduct. 
 

The trial judge addressed that issue at paras. 21–28 of her Reasons. Specifically, the trial judge found as follows:
 
Mr. Singh submits that he has some mental health issues that she was aware of and so he would not have known that his behaviour was harassing to her. He says that she knew he was on medications. Ms. Chapman had delivered it to him when their relationship terminated. He had told her that he had OCD, and she testified to that, and that he was depressed. In some of his emails he claimed that he was suicidal. She arranged to have a safety check done at one point.
 
However, he was still tutoring students, so he certainly had enough mental capacity to tutor students and there is no evidence that he was out of touch with reality or in any way psychotic. …
 
I find that Mr. Singh was at least reckless or willfully blind to the impact that his behaviour was having on her, and that any mental health issues he might have had did not impact his ability to recognize this. And further, that while their relationship had been off and on previously, Ms. Chapman was clear with him that it was over. The Fresh Evidence
 
 The proposed fresh evidence in this case consists of the following: a)


 
A comprehensive psychological assessment report, jointly prepared by Dr. Karen Whittemore, a psychologist, and Erin Fuller, a practicum student; b)


 
Two affidavits of Mr. Singh; and c)


 
Two affidavits of Talia Magder, trial counsel for Mr. Singh.
 
 The psychological report was prepared at the direction of the court, prior to sentencing, and considered by the trial judge at those proceedings. By that time, Mr. Singh had discharged Ms. Magder and was represented by Ms. de Jong.
 
 The report was based on multiple sources of information, including clinical interview, psychological testing, and review of past medical records of Mr. Singh. Those records showed prior diagnoses of depression and anxiety disorder, possibly OCD, and bouts of suicidal ideation. Mr. Singh had been admitted to hospital in both India and Canada, as recently as October 2018, related to concerns of anxiety, panic, stress, depression and suicidal ideation. 
 
 The affidavits of both Mr. Singh and Ms. Magder detail discussions between them, including via email, as part of the trial preparation. Mr. Singh clearly wished to place evidence of his ongoing mental health problems before the trial judge. He raised the issue of being found not criminally responsible on account of mental disorder (NCRMD) with Ms. Magder, by reference to an article he found online related to s. 16 of the Criminal Code. There is a conflict in the affidavit evidence on the narrow question of whether Mr. Singh explicitly instructed Ms. Magder to pursue a finding of not criminally responsible by reason of mental disorder at trial. Mr. Singh says he gave Ms. Magder such instructions. Ms. Magder deposes that during discussions shortly before trial, she advised Mr. Singh that NCRMD did not apply to his situation, and he did not expressly instruct her to pursue that verdict. Issues on Appeal
 
 The sole issue for determination is this, as set out in Ms. de Jong’s statement of argument: Did the appellant suffer a miscarriage of justice as a result of the ineffective assistance of trial counsel? Discussion and Analysis
 
 The ineffective assistance of counsel is said by the appellant to be the failure of trial counsel to advance evidence and submissions in support of a verdict of NCRMD, pursuant to s. 16 of the Criminal Code. The miscarriage of justice is said to be the finding of guilt and registering of a conviction, as opposed to the special verdict of NCRMD. It is against that backdrop that the matter must be considered.
 
 There is no doubt that the conviction of a morally innocent individual would be a miscarriage of justice. The policy reason for the existence of the special verdict of NCRMD is rooted in the principle that it is anathema to our criminal justice system that those who are incapable, by reason of mental disorder present at the time of the unlawful conduct, of knowing either the nature and quality of their actions or that such actions are objectively morally blameworthy, should be found guilty: R. v. Oomen, 1994 CanLII 101 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 507, at paras. 29–30; R. v. Swain, 1991 CanLII 104 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 933, at para. 45.
 
 It is those considerations that led to the result in the Court of Appeal’s decision of R. v. Warsing, 1997 CanLII 12527 (BC CA), B.C.J. No. 2239 followed by the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Warsing, 1998 CanLII 775 (SCC), 3 S.C.R. 579. At trial, Mr. Warsing made a tactical decision not to raise NCRMD, but rather relied on an alternate perpetrator defence. Post-conviction, a psychiatric report opined that Mr. Warsing suffered from a major mental illness at the time of the offences, and should have been found not criminally responsible.
 
 In the Court of Appeal, McEachern C.J.B.C. for the majority, decided that in the unusual circumstances of that case, the psychiatric evidence should be admitted on appeal as fresh evidence, despite the complete lack of due diligence on the part of the appellant. At para. 31, McEachern C.J.B.C. noted that the Palmer test for admission of fresh evidence should not apply “because a risk of injustice can overcome the requirement of due diligence.”
 
 The Court of Appeal therefore admitted the fresh evidence, and directed a new trial, confined to the issue of NCRMD.
 
 On further appeal, a majority of the Supreme Court of Canada dismissed the Crown appeal, but directed that there be a new trial on all issues. The appeal court lacked jurisdiction to limit the new trial to a single issue.
 

On the broader question of appellate jurisdiction when NCRMD is raised for the first time on appeal, Justice Major, for the majority, said this:
 
Mailloux dealt with the reasonableness of the jury's finding on a defence of NCRMD, not with the defence of NCRMD being raised for the first time at the appeal. To that extent and in the context of this appeal the observations of Lamer J. are not determinative of the question raised here. McEachern C.J.B.C. distinguished Buxbaum on its facts, noting that it did not involve the unusual history and conduct of an accused like the respondent. It is my opinion that it is in the interests of justice that Mailloux be read to recognize that where the defence of NCRMD is not raised at the trial and if the court of appeal concludes that it cannot make a determination with respect to NCRMD it is within the jurisdiction of the court of appeal in avoiding a miscarriage of justice, to order a new trial. In most cases it is likely that the court of appeal would have sufficient evidence to determine the NCRMD question. It is only in cases where the facts are complex and the court concludes that further evidence is required that a new trial would be ordered. [Emphasis added.]
 
 In this case, unlike Warsing, the appellant says he did wish to pursue a finding of NCRMD at trial, but was precluded from so doing by the conduct of his counsel. Mr. Singh stops short of saying that he expressly instructed Ms. Magder to seek a verdict of NCRMD, but does depose that he consistently instructed her that his mental illness should be put forward at trial, as part of his defence. Mr. Singh says that when he expressly raised the issue of mental illness impacting his criminal responsibility, Ms. Magder advised him not to pursue a “NCRMD defence”.
 
 Mr. Singh also complains of Ms. Magder’s refusal to obtain a psychiatric or psychological report in advance of trial, which would have provided valuable evidence of his mental illness.
 
 In cases where ineffective assistance of counsel is alleged on appeal, the court must consider whether a miscarriage of justice has occurred as a result of the acts or omissions of trial counsel. There is thus both a performance and a prejudice component to the analysis: R. v. G.D.B., 2000 SCC 22 at para. 26.
 

However, as noted in G.D.B., not every case will require the court to scrutinize the performance of trial counsel:
 
Miscarriages of justice may take many forms in this context. In some instances, counsel's performance may have resulted in procedural unfairness. In others, the reliability of the trial's result may have been compromised.
 
In those cases where it is apparent that no prejudice has occurred, it will usually be undesirable for appellate courts to consider the performance component of the analysis. The object of an ineffectiveness claim is not to grade counsel's performance or professional conduct. The latter is left to the profession's self-governing body. If it is appropriate to dispose of an ineffectiveness claim on the ground of no prejudice having occurred, that is the course to follow (Strickland, supra, at p. 697).
 

G.D.B. was considered and applied by the Court of Appeal in R. v. Aulakh, 2012 BCCA 340. At para. 68, Justice Smith set out the approach the court would there take to the matter:
 
In summary, I would propose to consider the appellant's application to adduce fresh evidence in the following manner: 1.


Determine if the fresh evidence is admissible under the rules of evidence (e.g., no hearsay, speculation, opinion or mere argument). 2.


If the fresh evidence complies with the rules of evidence and if it is apparent from the trial record that the fresh evidence could not reasonably have affected the result (assuming the allegations of ineffective representation could be established) there is no miscarriage of justice and the application to adduce fresh evidence and the appeal should be dismissed. 3.


If that determination is not apparent and the fresh evidence in support of the allegation of ineffective representation is relevant to that issue and credible, admit the fresh evidence for the limited purpose of determining the allegation of ineffective representation, an issue that was not adjudicated at trial. At this stage the fresh evidence will not be admissible to determine the substantive issue of whether a miscarriage of justice has occurred. 4.


In considering whether the performance component of the test for ineffective representation has been established, apply the standard of "reasonable professional judgment", remembering that the appellant must establish the facts underlying the claim of ineffective assistance on a balance of probabilities. 5.


If the performance component of the ineffective assistance of counsel claim is established, consider whether the appellant has established the prejudice component of the test, namely a "reasonable probability" that the outcome of the trial would have been different if the appellant had received the effective assistance of counsel (i.e., if there has there been a miscarriage of justice). If the answer is yes, the fresh evidence application should be granted, the appeal allowed, and a new trial ordered. If the answer is no, the fresh evidence and the appeal should both be dismissed.
 
 That is the manner in which I intend to analyze the present application to adduce fresh evidence, and ultimately, merits of the appeal.
 
 The fresh evidence here falls into two categories. The affidavit evidence is primarily aimed at the performance component. The psychological report goes directly to the prejudice component. I therefore intend to analyze it first, to determine if the appellant has suffered any prejudice.
 
 Clearly the report complies with the basic rules of evidence. It is an expert report, prepared by a qualified expert. Thus, it is prima facie admissible.
 
 However, in my view, the content of the report amply demonstrates that Mr. Singh has suffered no prejudice from its absence at trial, in that its reception could not have affected the result. This is not a case like Warsing, where the expert opined that the mental illness from which the accused suffered at the time of the offence should lead to a finding of not criminally responsible. The report in this case does not support such a finding.
 

Under the heading “Current Offence”, the report describes in some detail Mr. Singh’s perspective about his actions. In part, the report notes the following: When asked about the offence, Mr. Singh explained that he and [Ms. Chapman] had previously broken up approximately three times over “passive aggressive behaviour” and that he assumed they would get back together like they usually did. He said that despite the “red flags” in their relationship, he continued to pursue it because of his loneliness. He also explained that due to his mental health, he became dependent on her (e.g., “she was my family;” “she was my everything”). … When asked about the purpose of the repeated contact, Mr. Singh explained that he was trying to tell her about his difficulties and fears to his mental health and criminal matters and said he was “venting out”. … Mr. Singh explained that the more he saw her lack of concern and empathy as she ignored him, the more he wanted to contact her. He described [Ms. Chapman] as “narcissistic” and said that he was a victim to her behaviour (i.e., that she used him financially, sexually, and physically). Indeed, he explained that this was why he contacted her friends and workplace; because he wanted to inform them that she was narcissistic and needed to see a psychiatrist. … When asked who or what was to blame for the offence, he identified his mental health, his lack of knowledge of the dating norms in Canada, and [Ms. Chapman]. Specifically, he acknowledged that his mental health played a significant role (i.e., he said his abandonment feelings were triggered, he was emotionally distressed, and he had difficulty coping with intrusive thoughts) and said that his actions were not intentional due to this. However, he emphasized that if [Ms. Chapman] was a “good woman” she would have dealt with things differently. Further, he said he did not feel bad for the offence because [Ms. Chapman] was the guilty one and that she should be getting help for her own mental health rather than placing the blame on him. When asked if he wished he had done anything differently, he said he wished he had not shared so much with her (i.e., in terms of his family history, mental health, and loneliness).
 
 There is nothing in that account which supports a finding that Mr. Singh did not know that his actions were wrong from the perspective of societal norms. For the most part, Mr. Singh appears to be pointing to his mental health issues as an excuse for his behaviour and also blaming Ms. Chapman.
 
 Of even greater significance, under the heading “Diagnostic Impressions and Clinical Opinion”, the report notes the following: a)


 
Mr. Singh meets the diagnostic criteria for OCD, with fair insight, and appears to recognize that his intrusive thoughts may not be true; b)


 
In the past he met the diagnostic criteria for major depressive disorder, generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder, but they all appeared to be in at least partial remission; c)


 
Mr. Singh did not meet the diagnostic criteria for a personality disorder; d)


 
Mr. Singh did not appear to have a primary psychotic disorder; and e)


 
His difficulty coping with distressing events appeared to have exacerbated his mental health symptoms.
 
 In short, nothing in the medical opinion supports a conclusion that, at the time of the offence, Mr. Singh was suffering from a mental disorder that rendered him incapable of appreciating the nature and quality of his actions, or appreciating that those actions were wrong.
 
 The medical opinion could not have impacted the finding at trial that “there is no evidence that [Mr. Singh] was out of touch with reality or in any way psychotic.” The proposed fresh evidence could not have affected the result.
 
 The only impact the report could have had on the trial process was at sentencing, and the trial judge considered it in that context, in holding that Mr. Singh’s moral culpability was reduced because of his mental health issues.
 
 It is thus abundantly clear that there has been no miscarriage of justice. Conclusion
 
 The application to adduce fresh evidence is therefore dismissed. I need not consider the performance of counsel, and indeed it would be undesirable that I do so: G.D.B. at para. 29.
 
 For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is dismissed.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/sc/2023bcsc72.html
 


These reasons for judgment address Ms. Karaim's Charter s. 24(2) application, following upon my conclusion that she was arbitrarily detained in breach of s. 9, and that breaches of s. 10(a) and 10(b) of the Charter occurred, as set out in my reasons for judgment indexed at 2022 BCSC 1849 (the “Reasons”).
 


Ms. Karaim seeks to exclude the evidence of the police officers about their observations made when they searched her purse. That is, in particular, their observations of the cash, and the empty dime sized baggie imprinted with a marijuana leaf, of the same type as packaging found on the subsequent search of the vehicle.
 


In the Reasons, I found that search of the vehicle and the search of Ms. Karaim's purse were legal: paras. 72; 76-79. However I held that a reasonable person in Ms. Karaim's circumstances would reasonably believe that she was obliged to remain present while her purse was being searched, as part of the vehicle search: paras. 94, 98.
 


The detention of Ms. Karaim, within the meaning of s. 9, was brief, lasting only a few minutes, while her purse was searched, and until she was advised that she was free to go.
 


As the police officers did not believe they detained Ms. Karaim, in the technical sense, they did not comply with s. 10(a) and 10(b) of the Charter. Ms. Karaim was not promptly informed of the reason for her detention, and was not informed of her right to retain and instruct counsel without delay.
 


On the search the purse, the police noted some suspicious items: 
a)
 a large amount of cash, in the amount of approximately $4000; and b)
 a small, empty dime sized baggie with a marijuana leaf printed on it: paras. 47 to 48.
 


Ms. Karaim told the officers that the cash was her COVID 19 federal government CERB payment or payments. She said that the baggie was used to hold a piercing. After searching the purse, the officers told Ms. Karaim that she was free to go. She left on foot, with her purse. Subsequently, the officers completed the search of the vehicle. The police officers found various quantities of cocaine, methamphetamine, and fentanyl/heroin, and GHB in the vehicle, along with the number of items of drug paraphernalia, such as a digital scale, a gum tin containing numerous dime sized baggies (some with a marijuana leaf, of the same type as the officers noted in Ms. Karaim's purse), and other items: paras. 52, 53.
 


Ms. Karaim and Mr. Kinney are charged with four counts of unlawful possession of a controlled substance for the purpose of trafficking, contrary to s. 5(2) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, S.C. 1996, c. 19. II.


 
Legal Principles
 


The s. 24(2) inquiry is objective. It asks whether a reasonable person, informed of all relevant circumstances and the values underlying the Charter, would conclude that the admission of the evidence would bring the administration of justice into disrepute: R. v. Grant, 2009 SCC 32, at para. 68.
 
 When faced with an application for exclusion under s. 24(2), a court must assess and balance the effect of admitting the evidence on society's confidence in the justice system having regard to: 
1.
 the seriousness of the Charter infringing state conduct (admission may send the message the justice system condones serious state misconduct); 2.
 the impact of the breach on the Charter protected interests of the accused (admission may send the message that individual rights count for little); and 
3.
 society's interest in the adjudication of the case on its merits: Grant, para. 71.
 
 The court's role on a s. 24(2) application is to balance the assessments under each one of these lines of inquiry to determine whether, considering all the circumstances, admission of the evidence would bring the administration of justice into disrepute: Grant, para. 71. 
III.



Analysis 1.


 
Seriousness of the Charter infringing state conduct
 
 The more severe or deliberate the state conduct that led to the Charter violation, the greater the need for the courts to disassociate themselves from that conduct, by excluding evidence linked to that conduct, in order to preserve public confidence in and ensure state adherence to the rule of law: Grant, para. 72. 
 
 At one end of the spectrum, admission of evidence obtained through inadvertent or minor violations of the Charter may minimally undermine public confidence in the rule of law. At the other end of the spectrum, admitting evidence obtained through a willful or reckless disregard of Charter rights will inevitably have a negative effect on public confidence in the rule of law, and risk bringing the administration of justice into disrepute: Grant, para. 74; R. v. Tim, 2022 SCC 12, at para. 82.
 
 The breaches in this case were at the less serious end of the culpability scale. The breaches were inadvertent, minor, and reflect an understandable mistake.
 
 In the reasons, I discussed the principles relating to the meaning of “detention” under s. 9 and 10 of the Charter, at paras. 80-82. In this case, there was no real physical restraint, but I found that Ms. Karaim would have reasonably believed she was obliged to remain present while her purse was being searched: Reasons, para. 94. 
 
 It is not always easy for the police to accurately determine whether a person is detained within the meaning of s. 9. The question depends upon “the circumstances of the encounter as a whole”: R. v. Suberu, 2009 SCC 33, at para. 22. It may not be clear whether a person has been detained, in cases where there is no physical restraint or legal obligation: Grant, at para. 44(2).
 
 The circumstances of the individual is a factor: Grant, para. 44(2)(c). As noted in Suberu, every interaction with the police does not amount to a detention; even when a person is under investigation for criminal activity, is asked questions, or is physically delayed by contact with the police, they may not be detained within the meaning of s. 9: Suberu, paras. 23 and 24.
 
 In this case, the search of the purse was legal. Indeed, the police officers would have been derelict in their duty if, pursuant to the search of the vehicle, they had not searched the purse. Ms. Karaim did not want to leave without her purse. It was not unreasonable for the police officers to believe that Ms. Karaim was not formally detained within the meaning of s. 9 of the Charter.
 

In R. v. Omar, 2018 ONCA 975 Justice D.M. Brown, in dissent, noted: 
Grant offered general guidance at the conceptual level about when a psychological detention occurs. However, the jurisprudence reveals that the application of Grant's conceptual principles to the reality of street-level interactions stills leaves us in the situation described by the trial judge -- "the point at which an encounter becomes a detention is not always clear".
 
 Grant did not offer a conceptual “bright line” to which police officers could look in order to guide their on the street actions: Omar, para. 81. 
 
 The dissenting decision of Justice D.M. Brown was affirmed by the Supreme Court of Canada: R. v. Omar, 2019 SCC 32.
 
 In this case, the police officers were well aware of the concept of detention under s. 9, and of their obligations under s. 10(a) and (b) to promptly inform a person on arrest or detention of the reasons for that, and the person’s right to be informed of their right to retain and instruct counsel without delay. They reasonably believed that Ms. Karaim was not detained within the meaning of s. 9. They were acting and deciding in real-time, without full information, and without the opportunity for deliberation. I found differently, on a consideration of all of the circumstances, including the circumstances relating specifically to Ms. Karaim. 
 
 I conclude that the seriousness of the Charter infringing state conduct, viewed in terms of the gravity of the offending conduct, is low.
2.


 
Impact on the Charter protected interests of the Accused
 
 I held that Ms. Karaim was detained while her purse was being searched, which took only a few minutes. During that detention, she was asked couple of questions about the contents of her purse. She gave exculpatory answers. She was sent on her way, with her purse, including the cash and the baggie that the officers considered suspicious.
 
 Had the police officer specifically told Ms. Karaim that she was free to leave, before searching the purse, it is quite unlikely that I would have found a detention within the meaning of s. 9. 
 
 Since the search of the purse was legal, the impact of the breach does not relate to the fact that the purse was searched. It relates to the fact that Ms. Karaim was psychologically detained for a few minutes, and not told, during that time, of her rights under s. 10(a) and (b). The Crown is not seeking to tender any statements made by Ms. Karaim at the trial proper.
 
 In relation to the observations of the officers as to the contents of the purse, access to counsel would have made no difference, since the police were entitled to search the purse.
 
 In summary, the effect of the s. 9 breach was that, subjectively to Ms. Karaim, and objectively on my determination, her liberty interests were minimally interfered with, for a few minutes. The psychological detention was not intrusive. The impact of the breach was fleeting: Grant, para. 76.
 
 In summary, the impact on the Charter protected interests of the accused was low. 
3.


 
Society’s interests in the adjudication of the case on the merits
 
 The Crown's case will not be “gutted” by an order excluding the police officers’ observations. However the observations of the police officers as to the cash and the baggie may lead to important inferences. They are significant pieces of circumstantial evidence that may assist the Crown in establishing knowledge and control of the controlled substances found in the vehicle. Large quantities of cash are often hallmarks of drug trafficking, and have frequently been considered as significant pieces of circumstantial evidence in establishing knowledge and control: R. v. Fisher, 2005 BCCA 444 at para. 36; R. v. Liu, 2011 BCSC 1269 at para. 36.
 
 In Fisher, the accused was found with $1,380 in his pants pocket when arrested. K. Smith J.A. noted that “the evidence of the unexplained cash found in the appellant's pocket is particularly cogent”. 
 
 The third factor pulls in favour of admission of the evidence. 
4.


 
Balancing the Considerations
 
 Having made the above-noted inquiries, the Court must consider whether on balance the admission of the evidence obtained by a Charter breach would bring the administration of justice into disrepute. The task of the trial judge is to weigh the various indications. No overarching rule governs how the balance is to be struck; mathematical precision is obviously not possible: Grant, paras. 85, 86. The cumulative weight of the first two lines of inquiry are must be considered and balanced against the third line of inquiry: R. v. Beaver, 2022 SCC 54, at para. 134. Each factor must be assessed and weighed in the balance, focusing on the long-term integrity of, and public confidence in, the administration of justice: Tim, at para. 98.
 
 In this case, the first two lines of inquiry pull only weakly towards exclusion of the evidence. Society's interests in the adjudication of the case on the merits falls quite strongly in the other direction, towards admission of the evidence. I conclude that admission of the evidence would not bring the administration of justice into disrepute. A reasonable person, informed of all relevant circumstances and the values underlying the Charter, would not conclude that the admission of the evidence would bring the administration of justice into disrepute. IV.



Conclusion
 
 For these reasons, the application to exclude the evidence of the observations made by the police officers of the contents of Ms. Karaim’s purse is dismissed. 
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/sc/2023bcsc106.html
 


The accused, Angeline Marie Morris, is charged by way of indictment, that “on or about the 6th day of January, 2021, at or near Kamloops, in the Province of British Columbia, [she] did possess a loaded prohibited firearm without being the holder of an authorization or a licence and registration certificate for the firearm, contrary to Section 95(1) of the Criminal Code.”
 


She is also charged with three counts of possessing controlled substances contrary to s. 4(1) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, S.C. 1996, c. 19.
 


At the commencement of the trial, the accused pled guilty, and I entered guilty pleas to the three counts of possessing controlled substances. The trial proceeded on the first count of possessing a loaded prohibited firearm.
 


The Crown called two witnesses: the investigating officer, Cst. Bigcharles, and a firearms expert, Robert Caunt. The Evidence of Cst. Bigcharles
 


Cst. Bigcharles testified that at about 8 am on January 6, 2021, he responded to a report of a suspicious vehicle in a vacant lot on Tk’emups reserve land. The lot was in a residential area.
 


Cst. Bigcharles ran a computer check on the vehicle, and it was registered to a male person who was not the accused.
 


Cst. Bigcharles approached the truck on the driver’s side. The driver’s side window was fully open, and when he approached he was able to see in clearly.
 


He saw a female, passed out and apparently sleeping, in the driver’s seat with a half-eaten package of ice cream on her chest. There were no other occupants in the vehicle. He recognized the female as Ms. Morris, as he had previously interacted with her on several occasions. She was wearing a jacket, unzipped, with a hoodie underneath.
 


He woke her up, by shouting at her. At about that time, another officer named Buchanan arrived on scene. As Cst. Bigcharles was waking up the accused, Officer Buchanan advised that there was a can of bear spray on the passenger seat.
 
 Cst. Bigcharles asked the accused to step out of vehicle. She did so, and as she exited, Cst. Bigcharles observed a baggie of what appeared to be heroin on the floor of the vehicle on the driver’s side.
 
 At that time, he verbally arrested her for possession of a weapon, and for possession of controlled substances. 
 
 After handcuffing her, Cst. Bigcharles searched the accused. He found a modified flare gun, black in colour with a white zip tie on the barrel, in the accused’s right-hand jacket pocket. Cst. Bigcharles testified that he had to reach into her pocket to pull it out, and that it was approximately five inches deep in the pocket.
 
 He found a sum of cash in the hoodie, and he searched the car and found a purse containing pills, a scale, drugs, a pipe and empty baggies.
 
 Defence counsel cross-examined Cst. Bigcharles but his evidence was not shaken. Defence counsel suggested that the vehicle was found in an area which was known for nuisance wildlife, and suggested that there may have been flares or bear bangers or other such items in the vehicle, but Cst. Bigcharles did not agree with either of these propositions. He did concede that there were residences in the area around the vehicle which were known for drug activity.
 
 Cst. Bigcharles testified that after seizing the flare gun from the accused, he examined it. He observed one shotgun round in the chamber of the flare gun. There was a white zip tie to hold the barrel down. He cut the tie to open up the barrel, and observed that there was a screw which appeared to act as a firing pin.
 
 Cst. Bigcharles testified as to various photographs he had taken of the flare gun, its components and the other contents of the vehicle found at the time. He did not take any photos of either the interior or exterior of the vehicle. The Evidence of Robert Caunt
 
 The Crown called Robert Caunt to testify about the modified flare gun. Mr. Caunt has been a firearm and tool mark specialist for more than 22 years with the Vancouver Police Department. His qualifications to provide evidence about the flare gun and its characteristics were not disputed. A report and certificate authored by him was entered into evidence.
 
 He testified that he has seen flare guns of many varieties, and that he has seen the particular type of flare gun in this case, modified to discharge ammunition, on other occasions.
 
 He examined the flare gun in this case on May 3, 2021. He testified that it was a flare launcher modified with a new barrel made from steel and other material, and that the device was capable of chambering a .410 shotgun shell. He observed that the firing pin had been replaced with a screw which had been sharpened.
 
 The device was not originally designed to fire shells. The original barrel was entirely plastic, and was only intended to contain a flare. The original barrel was replaced by a steel replacement with a liner. The replacement barrel had a sufficient diameter to allow the device to accept a .410 shotgun shell.
 
 Black tape was wrapped around the grip area and the chamber end of the barrel. Mr. Caunt opined that the reason for that tape was to assist in the alignment of the firing pin when the barrel was closed. The zip tie would assist in holding the barrel closed.
 
 In order to test the device, Mr. Caunt inserted a primed shotgun shell and fired it. The device discharged the primer of the primed shotgun shell, and from that Mr. Caunt concluded that if one inserted a live cartridge into the device it would discharge the live cartridge. 
 
 He was asked why he did not test the device with live ammunition, and he said that in his opinion it was too dangerous to do so, and because to do so might result in the destruction of the exhibit.
 
 He testified that in another case, he did discharge a modified device, remotely for safety reasons. The result was that the device was destroyed but the shell exited the device. He said that he did not feel the need in this case to destroy the exhibit.
 
 As the result of his assessment, Mr. Caunt determined that the device was a functioning weapon that could cause serious bodily injury or death to a person.
 
 Mr. Caunt determined that the device’s barrel was 83 mm in length.
 
 He also discharged the shotgun shell and determined it to be ammunition. He put the shotgun shell into a lab-standard .410 shotgun and it discharged normally. I note that in any event, it was agreed in the agreed statement of facts that the ammunition found in the device meets the definition of ammunition in s. 84(1) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46.
 
 In cross-examination, defence counsel suggested that the flare gun would not have been capable of withstanding the pressure of a live shotgun shell. Mr. Caunt conceded that he did not directly test the device with a live shotgun shell for the reasons discussed above, but he observed that the barrel’s thickness was similar to that of a commercial firearm.
 
 Defence counsel suggested that it was possible that the shell would have detonated, rather than being shot down the barrel. Mr. Caunt’s answer was that the projectile would go down the muzzle although the breach face and frame would probably be destroyed.
 
 When asked whether he could say with certainty that the device would have fired, he said that he was quite certain that it would fire and meet the criteria of a firearm, in that it could cause serious bodily harm or death.
 
The Definition of Prohibited Firearm 
 
 “Firearm” is defined in s. 2 of the Criminal Code as “a barrelled weapon from which any shot, bullet or other projectile can be discharged and that is capable of causing serious bodily injury or death to a person, …”
 
 Section 84(1) defines a prohibited firearm as including “a handgun that has a barrel equal to or less than 105 mm in length, …”; and a handgun as meaning “a firearm that is designed, altered or intended to be aimed and fired by the action of one hand ...”
 
 Under s. 95(1), “every person commits an offence who, … possesses a loaded prohibited firearm … without being the holder of an authorization or a license ...” Issues
 
 The essential elements of the offence alleged in Count 1, which the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt, are that: a)
 The accused was the offender; b)
 The offence was committed on or about January 6, 2021, at or near Kamloops, British Columbia; c)
 The accused possessed a firearm; d)
 The firearm was loaded; e)
 The firearm was a prohibited firearm; and f)
 The accused did not hold an authorization or a licence under which she could possess the firearm in that place or a registration certificate for the firearm.
 

Regarding these elements, see R. v Montgomery, 2009 BCCA 41 at para. 61 in the context of a charge of possession of a loaded restricted firearm. 
 
 Further, the offence requires proof that the accused person had knowledge or was reckless or willfully blind with respect to the characteristics of the device which made it prohibited: see R. v. A.K., 1991 CanLII 416 (BC CA), B.C.J. No. 2953 (C.A.); and R. v. Aschert, 2017 BCSC 447.
 
 By way of an agreed statement of facts, it was admitted, among other things, that the accused was the offender, and that the accused did not hold an authorization, license or registration certificate for firearms.
 
 It is not disputed that the offence was committed on or about January 6, 2021, at or near Kamloops. There is no suggestion that the firearm was not loaded.
 
 The issues raised by the defence are whether the device was a prohibited firearm, whether it was in the accused’s possession, and whether the accused had knowledge or was reckless or willfully blind as to the characteristics of the device which made it prohibited. Whether the Device was a Prohibited Firearm
 
 The Crown submits that Mr. Caunt’s evidence establishes beyond a reasonable doubt that the device met the definition of a prohibited firearm. As stated above, a primed shotgun shell of similar length was successfully discharged from the device, and from this Mr. Caunt determined that the device could cause serious bodily injury or death.
 
 It is uncontested that the device’s barrel was less than 105 mm in length, and that it could be aimed or fired by the action of one hand.
 
 Defence counsel suggested that since Mr. Caunt did not test the device with live ammunition, it cannot be determined that it would have discharged an actual shell. However, as stated above, Mr. Caunt opined that although the frame probably would have been destroyed, he was quite certain that the weapon would have fired and met the criteria of a firearm. In this regard, I accept the evidence of Mr. Caunt.
 
 The fact that firing the device could have destroyed it is not legally relevant to the offence. There is no requirement in the Criminal Code that a firearm be capable of being fired repeatedly or multiple times. The Accused’s Knowledge
 

Defence counsel suggested that an ordinary person without Mr. Caunt’s knowledge would not have known the difference between a flare gun and the modified flare gun. She suggested, but without any evidentiary foundation, that the accused could have been carrying the device either because she had been camping or because the area in which she was arrested was known for nuisance wildlife.
 
 The law is clear that the trial judge is entitled to apply ordinary human experience and common sense in his or her assessment of the evidence. He or she should not apply speculative reasoning: R. v. Bi, 2011 BCCA 10, at paras. 15–16. As far as competing inferences from circumstantial evidence that might be open to a trial judge are concerned, he or she is “… not expected to treat real life cases as a completely intellectual exercise where no conclusion can be reached if there is the slightest competing possibility. The criminal law requires a very high degree of proof, especially for inferences consistent with guilt, but it does not demand certainty. …”: R. v. Ngo, 2009 BCCA 301 at para. 55. 
 
 In R. v. Villaroman, 2016 SCC 33, the Supreme Court of Canada held at para. 37:
 
When assessing circumstantial evidence, the trier of fact should consider "other plausible [page1020] theor[ies]" and "other reasonable possibilities" which are inconsistent with guilt: R. v. Comba, 1938 CanLII 14 (ON CA), O.R. 200 (C.A.), at pp. 205 and 211, per Middleton J.A., aff'd 1938 CanLII 7 (SCC), S.C.R. 396; R. v. Baigent, 2013 BCCA 28, 335 B.C.A.C. 11, at para. 20; R. v. Mitchell, QCA 394 (AustLII), at para. 35. I agree with the appellant that the Crown thus may need to negative these reasonable possibilities, but certainly does not need to "negative every possible conjecture, no matter how irrational or fanciful, which might be consistent with the innocence of the accused": R. v. Bagshaw, 1971 CanLII 13 (SCC), S.C.R. 2, at p. 8. "Other plausible theories" or "other reasonable possibilities" must be based on logic and experience applied to the evidence or the absence of evidence, not on speculation.
 
 
 The suggestion that the accused may have thought the device was an actual flare gun which could be used to deal with wildlife is speculative.
 
 The device contained a shotgun shell and was significantly modified by a metal barrel and black tape. It was found in the accused’s jacket pocket. The modifications to the flare gun can be clearly seen. In my view, the only reasonable inference is that the accused either knew that it was a firearm or was reckless or willfully blind to that fact. 
Possession
 
 Regarding the issue of possession, as stated above, the device was found in the right pocket of the accused’s jacket. Defence counsel suggested that someone could have accessed her pocket while she was sleeping but Cst. Bigcharles testified that the device was approximately five inches deep in her pocket and that he had to reach inside to retrieve it.
 

The only reasonable inference, in my view, is that the accused put the device into her own pocket. I reiterate the law from Villaroman cited above. Further, in a case particularly dealing with the issue of possession (of cocaine for the purpose of trafficking), the Court of Appeal held as follows in R. v. Guray, 2015 BCCA 183 at para. 30:
 
I do not think there is any possible conclusion other than that Mr. Guray knew he had the drugs in his pocket alongside other personal effects. To suggest that the drugs somehow found their way into his pockets without his knowledge calls for impermissible speculation in the absence of any evidentiary basis capable of supporting such an inference.
 
 In my view, this passage from Guray is applicable to the facts of this case. Conclusion
 
 I find, based on the totality of the evidence, that the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt the essential elements of Count 1. For the reasons stated above, I find Ms. Morris guilty of Count 1, the offence of possession of a prohibited firearm. 
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/sc/2023bcsc134.html
 


THE COURT: I wish to advise those present that there is an order in place banning the publication of information that may tend to identify the complainant, now victim, in this case. For this reason and for convenience, I will refer to the victim as O.H. Also, in the interests of time I do not intend to read out citations or all of the quotations that these reasons contain. Should a transcript be ordered I will add the headings, citations and quotations. Introduction
 


On December 18, 2021, a jury convicted Mr. Brozer of all counts of the Indictment which included Counts 1 and 2, the offences of sexual interference and invitation to sexual touching of O.H. on or about June 8, 2019, contrary to ss. 151 and 152 of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 [Code] respectively. Mr. Brozer was also convicted by a jury on Count 3, the offence of sexual assault of O.H. on June 8, 2019, contrary to s. 271 of the Code. 
 


The Crown and counsel for Mr. Brozer agree that due to overlap, Counts 2 and 3 should be conditionally stayed in accordance with the principle against multiple convictions articulated in R. v. Kienapple, 1974 CanLII 14 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 729. I am satisfied the offences of sexual assault and invitation to sexual touching under Counts 2 and 3 of the Indictment share the same factual and legal nexus and as such it is appropriate to direct a conditional stay of proceedings in relation to those Counts.
 


The court's current task is to determine a just and appropriate sentence in light of the circumstances of the offence, Mr. Brozer's circumstances, the impact of the offence on O.H., and also in accordance with the relevant law and sentencing principles including importantly the framework for sentencing in cases involving sexual offences against children established in R. v. Friesen, 2020 SCC 9 [Friesen]. 
Circumstances of the Offence
 


Mr. Brozer and O.H. became acquainted while working together at a restaurant. On June 8, 2019, they arranged to go to the beach together. At the time O.H. was 15 years old and in grade 10, and Mr. Brozer was 23 years old. 
 


Mr. Brozer came to O.H.'s house and picked her up in his car. Mr. Brozer told O.H. that he needed to stop by his house to pick something up. Mr. Brozer and O.H. drove to Mr. Brozer's house and they entered his house and ultimately his bedroom. O.H. sat on Mr. Brozer's bed. 
Mr. Brozer began kissing and cuddling O.H., which O.H. testified she was initially okay with. O.H. testified that she told Mr. Brozer she was 15 years old and they could not do anything sexual. 
 


Mr. Brozer escalated the sexual activity by removing O.H.'s pants and underwear and digitally penetrating her vagina, performing oral sex on her, and engaging in unprotected vaginal intercourse. 
O.H. testified that she did not consent to this activity. Mr. Brozer testified that O.H. was a willing participant in the sexual activity. As O.H. was 15 years old, she was incapable of consenting to the sexual activity. Following the sexual intercourse, Mr. Brozer drove O.H. back to her home. 
 


Mr. Brozer was charged with the offences in the Indictment and as I mentioned he was convicted by the jury on all Counts. 
 


On March 10, 2022, I rendered reasons for judgment regarding the factual findings for sentencing following the jury trial. In summary, as explained in those reasons, I accepted as expressed or implied facts essential to the jury's verdict of guilty on all counts on the Indictment that on June 8, 2019, Mr. Brozer committed all of the acts at issue against O.H. in Surrey, British Columbia, including that on that date O.H. was 15 years old and hence incapable of consenting and that the sexual intercourse occurred during which Mr. Brozer inserted his penis into O.H.'s vagina.
 
 I also reached an independent determination and was satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that at the time of the offences Mr. Brozer knew that O.H. was 15 years old and he did not wear a condom during the offences. I was not satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Brozer choked O.H. or forcibly held her down during the offences. Victim Impact
 
 During the sentencing hearing, O.H. read her victim impact statement into the record. O.H. described that when the offence took place it altered her perspective of the world and impacted every aspect of her life. She could no longer go to her workplace because she felt Mr. Brozer was present there. 
She described having trouble focussing at school. 
 
 O.H. said that many aspects of her day-to-day life have suffered as a result of what happened to her during the sexual assault. Her mental and physical health deteriorated and she has had trouble sleeping. 
 
 O.H. also describes feeling constantly worried about her personal safety since being victimized. All of these impacts have caused O.H. to avoid leaving her home and to suffer detrimental effects in all aspects of her personal life. O.H. indicates that she now has difficulty trusting others, especially males, since the offence. 
 
 O.H. explains that as a result of the offence she feels that she lost a part of herself she has been trying to get back ever since. 
 
 It is clear from O.H.'s statement that she is working hard to recover, despite the trauma that she experienced during and after the offence. 
Overall, O.H. struck me as a determined young person who is refusing, as she put it, to continue living in fear because of what Mr. Brozer did to her. The sexual violence that she endured has regrettably and undoubtedly left O.H. to deal with painful memories and emotions. Circumstances of the Offender
 
 Mr. Brozer is currently 27 years old. He was born in Alberta, although he moved with his sibling and parents to British Columbia when he was very young. Mr. Brozer was approximately five years old when his parents separated and he and his sibling lived with his mother. 
 
 Mr. Brozer has lived for many years in and around the same community in the Lower Mainland. He has a good and close relationship with his father, as well as extended family, such as his grandparents. His father re-partnered and Mr. Brozer has a good relationship with his stepmother and step-siblings. 
 
 Mr. Brozer graduated from high school and began living at his father's home. Mr. Brozer was diagnosed with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) in school and he required additional support for that condition during his school years. 
 
 Mr. Brozer has had steady employment, namely as a server in the food service industry for a number of years, including at the time of the offence. 
Mr. Brozer has also lived independently, with friends, and a girlfriend. 
 
 Mr. Brozer states that his career goal prior to his conviction was to work in law enforcement. He gained some experience volunteering and participating in “ride-along” opportunities with police officers. He completed the first level of requirements towards becoming a plumber. 
 
 Mr. Brozer denies having any history of mental health problems. He may have attended counselling around the time of his parents' separation but overall he reports having good mental health. 
 
 Mr. Brozer reports having long-term romantic relationships in the past. He has not had a long-term romantic relationship since the offence, and he adamantly denies being sexually attracted to underage females. Mr. Brozer is currently single and he has no children. 
 
 Mr. Brozer has no criminal record. He does not report having any issues with respect to alcohol or drug abuse. He first tried alcohol while in high school. In the past he also tried marijuana and other illicit drugs but he denies ever having a problem with excessive use of intoxicating substances. 
 
 Overall, Mr. Brozer's background appears to be relatively happy and stable. He enjoys a loving relationship with his family, and he reports having close friendships. Mr. Brozer appears to have good mental health, and he adjusted well to a childhood diagnoses of ADHD. 
Attitude to the Offences/Efforts Toward Rehabilitation
 
 Since being charged, Mr. Brozer has continued working in the food service industry, including most recently as a bouncer and bartender. Mr. Brozer currently lives in rented accommodation with a roommate. Mr. Brozer has had some short-term romantic relationships since the offence, and he reports no adverse issues in that area. 
 
 Mr. Brozer continues to report that the sexual activities he engaged in with O.H. were consensual. He also continues to deny knowing that O.H. was 15 years old at the time of the offence. He reports that he did not wear a condom because he never wears one and O.H. did not ask him to wear one. Mr. Brozer reports realizing that he "messed up" by failing to ascertain O.H.'s age at the time of the offence and he denies coercing or forcing O.H. to have sex with him.
 
 Mr. Brozer addressed the court at the conclusion of the sentencing submissions. He apologized for his actions and stated that if he could he would take back what he did. Mr. Brozer acknowledges the trauma he caused O.H. and he describes feeling remorse and regret for his actions. 
 
 Mr. Brozer describes the offence as out of character. He further describes experiencing the consequences of the conviction; for example, when he was let go from employment and by realizing that he was unlikely to qualify for a career in law enforcement. Since the offence, Mr. Brozer has attended some counselling sessions but he is not under the care of a psychologist or psychiatrist. 
Letters of Support
 
 Exhibit 2 in these proceedings are five letters of support written by Mr. Brozer's family and friends. These letters are all supportive of Mr. Brozer and they report that Mr. Brozer is deeply remorseful. Some of the letter writers acknowledge that Mr. Brozer can be impulsive, but all of them regard Mr. Brozer in a positive light and identify him as a person with a strong capacity to change and contribute meaningfully. 
 
 Mr. Brozer is described in these letters as polite, caring, helpful, trustworthy and honest. Many of the letter writers express a willingness to assist and support Mr. Brozer in the future and they set out numerous reasons for believing that Mr. Brozer has learned from the experience and that he will do whatever is necessary to avoid reoffending. 
 
 Again, Mr. Brozer has no criminal record, and he is a first-time offender. 
Presentence Report and Psychological Assessment
 
 Pursuant to s. 721 of the Code, presentence reports, including a presentence report by a probation officer and a registered psychologist report, were prepared setting out Mr. Brozer's personal history and his attitude towards the offence and the range of services that may be available to him. These reports were marked as Exhibits 3 and 4. I have reviewed these reports in the preparation of these reasons. 
 
 In a psychological report dated September 16, 2022, the assessing psychologist discusses the testing and personal interview results from Mr. Brozer and various collateral sources such as Mr. Brozer's father, a friend and his probation officer. Mr. Brozer denies having a sexual interest in underage females or in violent sexual activity, although he does report some involvement in consensual “rough” sexual activity with partners. Mr. Brozer views pornography regularly but denies having an interest in pornography that depicts violent sexual activity or underage females. 
 
 Mr. Brozer's psychological testing results do not suggest the presence of indicators of clinical psychopathology. He did not endorse any symptoms consistent with a mood disorder, nor interest in or arousal by pre-pubescent females. 
 
 In the risk assessment portion of the report, the assessor notes the presence of several risk factors, including Mr. Brozer's history of engaging in violent sexual activity with partners. Counsel for Mr. Brozer points out that according to Mr. Brozer this type of sexual activity was consensual activity with adult partners and he objects to any suggestion that Mr. Brozer engaged in past violent sexual activity on a non-consensual basis. The assessor also notes that O.H. alleges that Mr. Brozer choked and restrained her wrists during the sexual assault. The assessor acknowledges that the court concluded that such aggravating factors had not been proven beyond a reasonable doubt. 
 
 The assessor concludes that Mr. Brozer has some psychological adjustment issues related to self-awareness due to a disparity between his clear understanding of the inability of underage persons to engage in sexual activity and his ability to navigate and problem solve social situations with females of unknown ages. While the assessor regards some of Mr. Brozer's strategies for navigating the risks of encountering underage females as simplistic, it is noted that he did not have serious problems with, for example, extreme minimization or denial of sexual violence. No serious problems related to mental health or sexual deviance were identified. 
 
 The assessor found some problems related to Mr. Brozer's social adjustment; for example, surrounding, establishing and maintaining long-term intimate relationships due to issues of infidelity and lack of trust. On issues of manageability, the assessor noted some deficits regarding planning; for example, around career and employment in light of the conviction for the offences. It was noted that while he continued to work in the hospitality industry, this line of work may increase the chances of encountering high risk situations with underage females. 
 
 However, I note that Mr. Brozer has exercised caution in selecting his place and hours of work since the offence to reduce chances of encountering underage females at work. 
 
 The assessor concludes that if Mr. Brozer were to commit future acts of sexual violence, the most plausible scenario is likely to be a repeat of his past behaviour; namely, sexual activity with someone who is underage and more broadly involving a failure to obtain a consent. The assessor regards the imminence of this scenario as “chronic” (i.e., it could occur in coming months or years) but also acknowledges the likelihood is low due to Mr. Brozer's lack of interest in underage females, his awareness of the wrongfulness of his conduct and his willingness to participate in programs or interventions aimed at mitigating the risk of reoffending.
 
 Mr. Brozer's counsel disagrees with this aspect of the risk assessment and points out that Mr. Brozer is a first-time offender who suffered a one-time lapse in judgment in circumstances where Mr. Brozer has had no further issues since the charges were laid. 
 
 To reduce future risk, the assessor recommends additional treatment and psychoeducation regarding the nuances of consent, working with mental health professionals to help him understand how his prior sexual offending arose, and the development of safety plans to prevent similar situations in the future. 
 
 Overall I find the presentence reports support a conclusion that Mr. Brozer has not indicated a specific sexual interest in underage females, he has good awareness of the wrongful nature of sexual activity with underage persons, and his likelihood to commit future acts of sexual violence is generally assessed as low. Crown and Defence Position The Crown’s Position on Sentence
 
 The position of the Crown on sentence is that Mr. Brozer should be sentenced to three or four years in custody for the offence of sexual interference contrary to s. 151 of the Code. 
 
 The ancillary orders that Crown counsel says are required in this case include a mandatory DNA sample pursuant to s. 487.04(a) and 487.051(1) of the Code, a mandatory weapons prohibition pursuant to s. 109(1) and (2) of the Code for a period of not shorter than 10 years from the end of any imprisonment, and a mandatory order for compliance with the Sexual Offender Information Registration Act, S.C. 2004, c. 10 [SOIRA] 20years pursuant to s. 490.011(1), 490.012(1) and 490.013(2)(b) of the Code. 
 
 The Crown counsel also submits that it would be appropriate to make the following ancillary orders: a)
 Pursuant to s. 743.21 of the Code that Mr. Brozer have no contact or communications, directly or indirectly, with O.H. for the duration of his custodial sentence; and 
b)
 Pursuant to s. 161 of the Code for a period of 10 years Mr. Brozer be prohibited from: 




 
i.

 
attending a public park or public swimming area where persons under the age of 16 years are present or can reasonably be expected to be present, or a daycare centre, a schoolground, playground, or community centre; 



 
ii.

 
seeking, obtaining or continuing any employment whether or not the employment is renumerated, or becoming a volunteer in a capacity that involves being in a position of trust or authority towards persons under the age of 16 years; and 



 
iii.

 
having contact including communicating by any means with a person who is under the age of 16 years except for immediate family members or in accordance with a further order of this court.
 
 Crown counsel acknowledges that a conditional sentence order is an available sentence. However, Crown counsel takes the position that given the nature of the offence against an under-aged person, and especially in light of the principles set out in Friesen, a conditional sentence order would not be a fit and proper sentence in all of the circumstances. 
 
 Crown counsel submits that the following are aggravating factors for the court to consider: 
a)
 Mr. Brozer subjected O.H. to the most invasive form of sexual violence, namely, penile/vaginal penetration, in addition to other sexual activity. 
b)
 Mr. Brozer did not wear a condom during the offence. 
c)
 Mr. Brozer knew that O.H. was 15 years old at the time of the offence. 
d)
 Mr. Brozer planned the sexual activity and he diverted O.H. to his home instead of the beach as part of his plan. 
e)
 Mr. Brozer was O.H.'s means of transportation on the day in question, which increased her vulnerability.
 
 Crown counsel submits that the following are mitigating factors to consider: 
a)
 Mr. Brozer has no criminal record; 
b)
 Mr. Brozer is employed; and 
c)
 Mr. Brozer has supports in the community.
 
 Crown counsel provided the court with case authorities discussing sentencing, including in relation to the sentences for sexual interference or sexual assault of a child. I have reviewed and considered all of those authorities. Defence Position on Sentence
 
 Defence counsel opposes the Crown's position of a three to four year sentence of incarceration. Defence counsel submits that a conditional sentence order (CSO) for two years less a day with a three-year probationary order is the appropriate sentence, especially given that Mr. Brozer is a youthful first-time offender. 
 
 Defence counsel emphasizes that the circumstances at bar involve a one-time lapse of judgment by Mr. Brozer at a time when O.H. was not quite 16 years old. Defence counsel submits that the circumstances satisfy the requirements described in s. 742.1 of the Code for imposing a CSO. 
In short, defence counsel submits that imposing a CSO with a three-year probationary order aligns with the principle of constraint and it would have the necessary deterrent effect. 
 
 Defence counsel submits that there was no evidence that Mr. Brozer planned the sexual activity that is the subject of the charges. I agree that there was no evidence from any witness to the effect that Mr. Brozer planned the offence on the day in question. 
 
 I reviewed and considered the submissions made by defence counsel. 
Defence counsel referred me to a number of cases, including R. v. Scofield, 2019 BCCA 3 [Scofield], R. v. Vaux, 2021 BCSC 1773 [Vaux],
 R. v. P.R.J., 2021 BCSC 2537 [P.R.J.] and R. v. Chen, 2021 BCSC 697 [Chen] all of which I have read and considered. 
The Law
 
 There is no disagreement as to the applicable law. 
Principles of Sentencing
 
 The fundamental principles and purposes to be considered by courts in sentencing are set out in ss. 718 and 718.2 of the Code. 
 
 Section 718 of the Code provides that the fundamental purpose of sentencing is “to protect society and to contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions" with reference to six objectives. These objectives are: denunciation of unlawful conduct; deterring the offender and other persons from committing offences; separating offenders from society where necessary; assisting in rehabilitating offenders; providing reparations for harm done to victims and the community; and promoting a sense of responsibility in offenders, acknowledging the harm done to victims or to the community. 
 
 Sentencing is an exercise of balancing. No single objective trumps the others. A sentencing judge's role is to determine which objectives merit the greatest weight, given the circumstances of the offence and the offender: R. v. Nasogaluak, 2010 SCC 6 at para. 43.
 
 As the offence at issue in this case involves an underage person, s. 718.01 of the Code provides that a sentencing judge must given primary consideration to the objectives of denunciation and deterrence in sentencing Mr. Brozer. The sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender: s. 718.1. 
 
 Section 718.2 of the Code describes a number of specific principles to be considered in sentencing, including that the sentence should account for any relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances: s. 718.2(a). 
As I mentioned, it is not disputed that because O.H. was a 15-year-old at the time of the offence, this constitutes an aggravating factor: s. 718.2(a)(ii.1). 
 

The Supreme Court of Canada in Friesen, at para. 5 provides clear instructions for sentencing in cases involving sexual offences against children: 
 
 … we send a strong message that sexual offences against children are violent crimes that wrongfully exploit children’s vulnerability and cause profound harm to children, families, and communities. Sentences for these crimes must increase. Courts must impose sentences that are proportional to the gravity of sexual offences against children and the degree of responsibility of the offender, as informed by Parliament’s sentencing initiatives and by society’s deepened understanding of the wrongfulness and harmfulness of sexual violence against children. Sentences must accurately reflect the wrongfulness of sexual violence against children and the far-reaching and ongoing harm that it causes to children, families, and society at large.
 
 The court in Friesen makes clear that established sentencing ranges for sexual violence against children must increase relative to the ranges established for sexual violence against adults: Friesen, paras. 114-118. 
 
 The court states that “mid‑single digit penitentiary terms for sexual offences against children are normal and upper‑single digit and double digit penitentiary terms should be neither unusual nor reserved for rare or exceptional circumstances”: Friesen, para. 114.
 
 In R. v. Williams, 2020 BCCA 286 at paras. 11-21 [Williams] our Court of Appeal describes the principles set out in Friesen and their impact on, for example, sentencing ranges previously established in British Columbia. However, the court declines to set the “appropriate range” for British Columbia and instead emphasizes that a new analytical framework is to be applied to the sentencing of sexual offences against children: Williams, at paras. 50-51. 
Analysis
 
 Keeping in mind the principles and guidance provided by the Code, Friesen and Williams, I turn now to the particular circumstances of this case starting with the mitigating and aggravating factors. 
Mitigating Factors
 
 Mr. Brozer has no criminal record. Additionally, as a 23-year-old at the time of the offence, he is a youthful offender with a history of steady employment before and after the offence. The many letters of support, as well as the information contained in the presentence reports, indicate that Mr. Brozer has a supportive social network to assist him during and after his sentence. In my view, these are all mitigating factors. 
 
 Mr. Brozer had a stable upbringing and a relatively happy childhood. There is no suggestion that anything in Mr. Brozer's background, such as mental health issues, is a mitigating factor. 
Aggravating Factors
 
 As I mentioned, s. 718.2 of the Code provides a deemed aggravating factor in the circumstances of this case, namely, that the offence was committed on O.H. at a time when she was 15 years old. 
 
 There is also the aggravating factor of the major impact of the offence on O.H. which she described to me through her victim impact statement. 
I also note that Mr. Brozer did not wear a condom during sexual intercourse with O.H. Mr. Brozer told the presentence report writer he never wears a condom and he did not wear one during the offence because O.H. did not ask him to. Given that Mr. Brozer exposed O.H. not only to a highly invasive form of sexual violence, but also to the obvious health risks associated with having unprotected sexual intercourse, I find this to be an aggravating factor. It is no answer for Mr. Brozer to point out that the victim did not ask him to wear a condom. 
 
 My finding that Mr. Brozer knew O.H. was 15 years old when the offence occurred is also a factor that I must take into account in sentencing since it tends to increase his moral culpability as compared to an offender who failed to take all reasonable steps to determine a complainant's age: R v. Angel, 2018 BCSC 1751, para. 70. 
 
 Defence counsel submits that in order to carry out the objectives of s. 718 of the Code, I ought to, in addition to taking into account the few aggravating factors and the important mitigating circumstances, also take guidance from the reasoning for imposing conditional sentences on offenders in P.R.J. and Vaux, so as to not deprive Mr. Brozer of his liberty because a less restrictive sanction would be appropriate in all of the circumstances. 
 
 Defence counsel urges me to consider a number of circumstances related to O.H. such as the fact that she was not “really” a vulnerable child because, for example, she worked and paid taxes, she initiated the outing with Mr. Brozer on the day in question, and there was evidence that she was initially okay with Mr. Brozer kissing her. By raising these points, defence counsel was clear to say that he was not suggesting that O.H. had somehow asked to be the victim of sexual violence.
 
 In my view, these submissions potentially invite me to diminish O.H.'s entitlement to protection as an underage person. I remind myself not to rely on stereotypes that minimize the harm and wrongful nature of sexual violence against children, including teenage children. Mr. Brozer, as a 23-year-old adult, had the onus to avoid sexual violence directed towards a child and, as noted in Williams, the victim's degree of participation in the offence is not a legally relevant consideration at sentencing: Williams, at para. 21, citing Friesen, at para. 154. 
 
 As required by the authorities, deterrence and denunciation are paramount considerations in sentencing Mr. Brozer for this offence. I have considered the other sentencing principles, including rehabilitation and all of the sentencing options. As I already mentioned, I have also reviewed both counsel's oral and written submissions and considered the case authorities that I was referred to. 
 
 In support of the submissions that a CSO is a fit and appropriate sentence, defence counsel referred me to Scofield, which predates Friesen, where our Court of Appeal considered, among other things, the constitutionality of the mandatory minimum sentence for sexual interference and whether a CSO was a fit and proper sentence. Mr. Scofield was 22 at the time of the offences and there were two complainants and numerous instances of sexual violence including sexual intercourse. Mr. Scofield had significant cognitive impairments and he pled guilty to some of the counts. 
 
 Although the Court of Appeal agrees that a CSO is an appropriate sentence in the rare circumstances at issue in Scofield, the court emphasizes, at para. 70, that conditional sentences will rarely satisfy the primary sentencing objectives of deterrence and denunciation in cases involving sexual touching of vulnerable children, especially where there is abuse of trust or authority. I realize that in the case before me there is no suggestion that Mr. Brozer's conduct involved abuse of trust or authority. 
 
 In Vaux, the court concluded that a CSO was a fit and proper sentence for Mr. Vaux, who pled guilty to two counts of sexual interference, which included vaginal intercourse with two underaged female victims. In light of Mr. Vaux's unique and exceptional personal circumstances, including that he was a first-time Indigenous offender who was diagnosed in childhood with specific disorders that caused him significant social and developmental challenges, a CSO was made. 
 
 In P.R.J., the court concluded that a CSO was a fit and proper sentence for an offender who was convicted of one count of sexual interference and one count of invitation to sexual touching involving her seven or eight-year-old daughter. The offences consisted of the offender digitally penetrating and kissing the victim's vagina and causing the victim to touch her own vagina. 
 
 As a result of the offences, the victim was removed from the care of the offender. The court concluded a CSO was an appropriate sentence because, among other things, the offender had no criminal record, the child had been removed from the offender's care, and the offences were an aberration in the mother/daughter relationship that did not reoccur in the period afterwards and were driven by the offender's alcohol and substance abuse issues. 
 
 I have also considered R. v. Proulx, 2000 SCC 5, and the factors outlined in R. v. Bremner, 2000 BCCA 345 for the consideration as to whether a CSO would accord with the principles of denunciation and general deterrence. 
 
 I recognize that there are a number of factors present before me that potentially weigh in favour of a CSO. For example, Mr. Brozer has no criminal record, he was only 23 at the time of the offences, there is no evidence of subsequent offending, there is evidence of a good work history, and a psychological assessment indicating that Mr. Brozer's risk of recidivism is generally low. 
 
 However, upon considering all of the relevant factors, I have decided that a CSO is not a fit and proper sentence in all of the circumstances because it does not meet the requirements of deterrence, both general and specific, and denunciation in relation to sexual interference contrary to s. 151 of the Code. 
 
 I reach this conclusion, including because I find that the circumstances before me do not involve the kind of rare or exceptional circumstances that the courts have identified in cases such as Vaux and P.R.J. Further, in the circumstances I conclude a CSO would also fail to adequately address the profound harm to O.H. resulting from the offence.
 
 When I consider all of the circumstances discussed in the context of the highly individualized sentencing exercise before me, I conclude that a term of imprisonment is called for by the principles of sentencing and by the application of the Friesen factors: Friesen, para. 121. In my view, given all of the circumstances, the other form of sentence suggested, mainly a CSO and probation order, is not a fit and proper sentence. 
 
 I found R. v. G.T.A., 2021 BCCA 425 [G.T.A.] to be a helpful reference because it shares some factual similarity with the present case, including because the offender met the underaged victim as a result of working with her. In G.T.A., the offender was 23 and the victim was 15 years old. The offender knew the victim's age and he began a relationship with her that spanned a period of ten months, involved numerous instances of sexual activity, including sexual intercourse, over the course of the relationship. 
Again, I recognize that in the case at bar, the offence happened on one occasion and not over the course of many months. 
 
 In G.T.A., there were some mitigating circumstances that are absent in the case at bar, including a guilty plea and the offender's history of significant mental health issues. The sentencing judge arrived at a sentence of three years for the sexual interference count. 
 
 On appeal, the court dismissed the appeal from that sentence disagreeing with the appellant that it was demonstrably unfit. The Court of Appeal further found nothing exceptional about the case to take it outside of the usual sentencing range: GTA at paras. 87-88. I read G.T.A. as supportive of my conclusion that in the case at bar there are no exceptional or rare circumstances that would support a CSO or take this matter out of the usual sentencing range. 
Imposition of Sentence
 
 Mr. Brozer, please stand as I am now going to impose a sentence.
 
 On the charge of sexual interference of O.H. contrary to s. 151 of the Code, which is Count 1 of the Indictment, I impose a custodial sentence of three years. 
 
 Pursuant to s. 743.21 of the Code, I order Mr. Brozer to have no contact or communication, directly or indirectly, with O.H. for the duration of this custodial sentence.
 
 In addition, there will be the following ancillary orders: 
1.
 Pursuant to s. 487.051(1) of the Code, there will be a DNA order. Pursuant to s. 487.05(1), I authorize the taking of samples of bodily substances from Mr. Brozer reasonably required for the purposes of forensic DNA analysis. 2.
 Pursuant to s. 109(1) and (2) of the Code, Mr. Brozer, you are prohibited from possessing any firearm, other than a prohibited firearm or restricted firearm, and any crossbow, restricted weapon, ammunition and explosive substance during the period that begins on the day on which this order is made and ending not earlier than ten years after your release from imprisonment after conviction for this offence. Mr. Brozer, you are prohibited from possessing any prohibited firearm, restricted firearm, prohibited weapon, prohibited device and prohibited ammunition for life; and 3.
 Pursuant to s. 491.011(a), and 490.012(1), and 490.013(2)(b) of the Code, there will be an order requiring Mr. Brozer to comply with the provisions of the SOIRA for 20 years.
 
 Regarding the Crown counsel's request for orders pursuant to s. 161 of the Code, I am not satisfied in light of all of the circumstances, including because Mr. Brozer will be required to comply with SOIRA for a lengthy period, that it is necessary to make the order sought. I therefore, decline to do so. 
 
 That concludes my oral reasons for sentence. Counsel, we may now adjourn. Thank you.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/sc/2023bcsc147.html
 


The accused, Jean-Luc Perignon, stands charged with one count of aggravated assault, contrary to s. 268(2) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46. He does not dispute that on April 17, 2017, he stabbed his then wife in the back with a kitchen knife, as the Crown alleges. 
 


Despite what occurred, he asks the court to find him not guilty, on the grounds that he was not acting voluntarily at the time. In particular, he claims that he was in a state of automatism, unassociated with any mental disorder, as a result of having consumed a cocktail of prescription drugs and alcohol prior to the incident.
 


As defence counsel acknowledged in his closing submissions, such a defence will rarely succeed. The courts are justifiably reluctant to acquit on that ground due to policy concerns about the feignability of such a condition and the need to maintain respect for the administration of justice. Because the law assumes that, in general, people act voluntarily and are responsible for their actions, Mr. Perignon bears a heavy burden to demonstrate that the ordinary presumption should not apply here. Nevertheless, he says that he has met that burden. 
 


The Crown disagrees. In the Crown’s submission, the evidence before the court does not rise to the requisite level to justify an acquittal. 
II.


 
The Facts
 


I will begin my discussion with a recitation of the background facts, which are generally not in dispute.
 


Mr. Perignon was born in France in 1962. He moved to Canada at a young age. He eventually found his way to Montreal, where, after trying his hand at various careers, he worked as an IT consultant. He met his future wife, Debra Perignon, in 1990. They were married in 2007 and remained together until the incident that is the subject of this proceeding. They have three daughters, Rochelle, Kaitlin and Olivia. The older two daughters testified as part of the Crown’s case. Mr. Perignon has had no contact with his former wife or their youngest daughter, Olivia, who still lives with her, since that time.
 


Mr. Perignon’s relevant medical history begins with injuries he sustained in two motor vehicle accidents, the first in 2002 and the second in 2007. The earlier of these occurred when he was still living in Montreal. He was struck by a motor vehicle while he was crossing a busy street in downtown Montreal as a pedestrian. As a result of that accident, he suffered a compression fracture in his spine. 
 


He was treated initially with physiotherapy and simulated cell regrowth. He soon became dependent on escalating dosages of opioids to control his pain. These issues exacerbated a problem he had been having for much of his adult life with insomnia. Since the 1980s, when he was in his late teens, he had been taking bromazepam, a drug in the benzodiazepine family, to help him sleep.
 


In 2006, Mr. and Ms. Perignon relocated from Montreal to the Sunshine Coast area of British Columbia. They hoped that the milder climate would alleviate his pain symptoms. Mr. Perignon had spent part of his childhood there and his mother was still living there at the time. They eventually bought a two-story house on Celestial Place in Gibsons. Mr. Perignon’s mother introduced him to her family physician, Dr. Scott, who agreed to take Mr. Perignon on as a patient.
 
 They had not been living on the Sunshine Coast for very long before Mr. Perignon was involved in a second motor vehicle accident, which exacerbated his pre-existing injuries. Dr. Scott tried to reduce Mr. Perignon’s intake of opioid medications but Mr. Perignon did not respond well to the change. Dr. Scott referred him to Dr. White, a psychiatrist, for cognitive behavioural therapy. Mr. Perignon remained primarily under the care of Dr. White for the next ten years, until the incident that is the subject of this proceeding. Over those years, Dr. White attempted, with some success, to reduce Mr. Perignon’s opioid intake. 
 
 In the meantime, Mr. Perignon’s consumption of bromazepam for insomnia continued unabated. That medication allowed him to sleep well. On June 1, 2016, however, the British Columbia College of Physicians and Surgeons amended its professional standards and guidelines to prohibit the prescription of benzodiazepines or sedative hypnotics together with opioids. After becoming aware of the new restriction, Dr. White told Mr. Perignon that he could no longer continue taking opioid medications together with bromazepam, but had to choose one or the other. Mr. Perignon decided to give up bromazepam, because his wife had just been laid off from her job and he thought it more important that he control his pain so he could continue working. Mr. Perignon’s PharmaNet records show that on July 14, 2016, he was dispensed bromazepam for the last time prior to the date of the alleged offence.
 
 The same document issued by the College ended with the following note of caution: “Benzodiazepine tapering should be gradual because of the significant risk of benzodiazepine withdrawal.” It appears that warning went unheeded in Mr. Perignon’s case. Soon after he stopped taking bromazepam, he began having withdrawal symptoms. His insomnia returned with a vengeance. He recalls having tremors. In consultation with Dr. White, he began experimenting with a variety of substitutes, including trazodone, clonazepam, quetiapine, cyclobenzaprine, duloxetine and pregabalin. None of these were successful in restoring a stable sleep pattern. Over the Christmas holiday in 2016, he tried yet another drug, baclofen, but it caused him to sleep through the whole of Christmas day. In his frustration, he says he tried, on one or two occasions, to force himself to sleep by consuming large quantities of vodka, but this made him nauseous rather than sleepy. He testified that he consumed no vodka on the date of the alleged offence, and indeed, he was not observed doing so.
 
 Dr. White appeared to be at a loss as to what to do about Mr. Perignon’s predicament. He was changing Mr. Perignon’s prescriptions every two weeks or so. Ms. Perignon noticed that Mr. Perignon’s moods had become volatile. He would say strange things unpredictably. She accompanied him to an appointment with Dr. White and, while there, complained to Dr. White that she thought he was treating her husband like a guinea pig.
 
 In January 2017, Dr. White prescribed zopiclone, known as a sedative hypnotic, for the first time. Unlike bromazepam, it is not in the benzodiazepine family, although it is said to have a similar pharmacology. It is also known to have potentially serious side effects, including, among many others, antegrade amnesia and complex sleep behaviours. The latter are, according to one of the psychiatric reports in evidence, “complex activities, normally associated with wakefulness, that occur when the subject is in a sleep-like state.” 
 
 Because of the pharmacological similarity between zopiclone and the benzodiazepines, the same dangers arise when either are combined with opioids. In light of these and the various other risks it poses, it is not recommended that patients take zopiclone more than ten days in a row.
 
 In any event, Mr. Perignon’s PharmaNet history indicates that in early 2017, he was dispensed 14 pills, each containing 5 mg of zopiclone. Mr. Perignon recalls that at that dosage, he saw no improvement in his sleep and experienced no side effects other than a metallic taste in his mouth. In March 2017, Dr. White had him try another drug, doxepin. Mr. Perignon stopped taking that one after only one day because, he says, it made him short-tempered. He asked Dr. White to try something else but by then Dr. White appeared to be running out of ideas. It was at that point that, according to Mr. Perignon, they discussed reverting to zopiclone, but this time Dr. White suggested increasing the dosage by half a pill at a time until it began working. 
 
 Strange as it may seem, Mr. Perignon’s account is confirmed to some extent by the PharmaNet records. They show that on April 6, 2017, 11 days before the date of the alleged offence, he was dispensed 30 tablets of zopiclone at the increased concentration of 7.5 mg per tablet. Mr. Perignon says that in keeping with Dr. White’s instructions, he took one tablet on April 12, 1.5 on April 13, two on April 14, 2.5 on April 15, three on April 16 and 3.5 on April 17. At 7.5 mg per tablet, the latter dose would have amounted to a total of 26.25 mg. According to Dr. Kolchak, one of the psychiatrists who testified at trial, this was “well beyond the recommended range of prescription for this medication.”
 
 While experimenting in this way with zopiclone, Mr. Perignon also continued to take a dangerously high dosage of opioids, the equivalent of 400 mg of morphine per day. Dr. White had already reduced Mr. Perignon’s opioid intake from a previous peak at the equivalent of 1650 mg. Dr. Lu, another of the psychiatrists who testified for the defence, put those quantities into perspective by explaining that a dose of 200-300 mg is enough to be fatal for someone naïve to opioids. Current guidelines suggest that any dose greater than 90 mg is considered high-risk. In the days prior to the alleged offence, Dr. White had decided to refer Mr. Perignon to another specialist, Dr. Resnick, to help wean him off opioids. An appointment with that physician was booked for Wednesday, April 19, 2017, two days after the date of the alleged offence.
 
 So matters stood with Mr. Perignon’s prescription drug regimen when, on the Easter weekend in April 2017, he and Ms. Perignon hosted their three daughters in their home for the holiday. Also staying with them that long weekend was Kaitlin’s then partner, Russell Dunsford. 
 
 They had a family dinner together on Easter Monday, April 17, 2017. Kaitlin and Rochelle had the impression that Mr. Perignon was behaving normally that day, at least until the end of the dinner. He was joking with them as he helped with the dinner preparations. Kaitlin thought his mood at dinner was better than normal. Ms. Perignon had the impression that he was “a bit more off, more than normal”. His eyes, she thought, were “funny” and he was saying things that did not make sense. They did not have any arguments that weekend, although they were, by then, sleeping in separate bedrooms due to Mr. Perignon’s ongoing struggles with insomnia.
 
 Although, as I have already noted, Mr. Perignon did not consume vodka on that date, he did have three or four drinks of pastis, an anise-flavoured liqueur, which he mixed with water, around or just before dinner time. The dinner ended at around 7:30 or 8 pm.
 
 After dinner, Ms. Perignon and Olivia went into the living room to watch a movie. Mr. Perignon came into the room while they were doing so and wanted to discuss his latest plan to replace the opioids with lighter medications. Ms. Perignon told him that she did not want to have that discussion with him at that particular time. After a second unsuccessful attempt to speak to her, he returned to his bedroom. 
 
 After the movie ended at around 10 pm, Ms. Perignon sent Olivia to bed and went to the front door to let the dog out before retiring to bed herself. As she was doing so, she heard Mr. Perignon’s footsteps on the stairs behind her. She never saw him, nor did she hear him say anything. She felt a “thump” in her back and realised she had been stabbed. She reached behind her back for the knife and pulled it out herself, cutting her thumb badly in the process. She recalls screaming and having trouble breathing as Kaitlin and Mr. Dunsford came to her aid a few minutes later.
 
 Mr. Perignon’s testified that his memory of the events that occurred on that day blended into one another. He recalls having dinner with the family and retiring to his home-office to watch a movie. As was his routine at the time, he took trazodone, an antidepressant, and his usual mix of opioids three times that day. Approximately ten minutes before retiring to bed, he also took the 3.5 tablets of zopiclone that I have already mentioned. After that, he remembers taking off his shoes and socks before getting into bed. He remembers feeling pain in his back. 
 
 His next memory is standing over his wife while she was lying on the floor in front of him, screaming in pain. He remembers seeing the kitchen knife on the floor near her. He was in shock. He did not know how he had got to the front door on the ground floor – his bedroom was on the second floor. He recalls running back up the stairs to his bedroom to retrieve his cell phone in order to call 911. He locked himself in the bedroom because he feared he might pose a danger to the others present in the house. 
 
 According to the 911 call log, he reached the dispatcher at nine minutes past 10 pm. He stated that his wife was badly injured and needed an ambulance. When asked what was going on, he responded that he had just stabbed her. He was then asked where his wife was at that moment. His response was that, “she’s okay, … it wasn’t a killing wound …” After asking several times where the ambulance was, and as he was heading back downstairs, he stated to either the dispatcher, his other family members, or the police officer who had just arrived, that he “just did something really stupid.”
 
 When the police arrived, Mr. Perignon was immediately arrested and taken into custody. He was warned that he was under investigation for attempted murder. One of the attending officers returned to the house to retrieve four medications that Mr. Perignon said he needed. When the officer got to Mr. Perignon’s washroom, he observed what he thought was about a hundred pill bottles in a plastic shopping bag.
 
 Mr. Perignon has only sporadic memories of the ride to the police station. He remembers sleeping soundly in the cells that night. On April 19, 2017, he gave a lengthy statement to the police that was, with some minor exceptions that I will discuss later, generally consistent with his testimony at trial.
 
 By the end of following month, Mr. Perignon had stopped taking opioids altogether. Soon after that, he resumed taking bromazepam and has had no difficulty sleeping since then. III.



The Psychiatric Evidence
 
 As part of his defence, Mr. Perignon adduced written and oral evidence from two psychiatrists, Dr. Andrew Kolchak and Dr. Shaohua Lu. Without objection from the Crown, both were qualified as experts in abnormal mental states, including dissociative states, and the impact of medications on them.
 
 Dr. Kolchak noted that Mr. Perignon’s behaviour at the material time, if one accepts his account of what occurred, resembled complex sleep behaviour. However, it was unclear to Dr. Kolchak precisely what was going on in Mr. Perignon’s mind at the time. Dr. Kolchak considered the possibility that the stabbing was triggered in part by anger towards his wife, perhaps as a result of an argument they may have had just before. Even if that were so, however, in Dr. Kolchak’s view, it is likely that Mr. Perignon was intoxicated by the prescription medications he had consumed and that he was experiencing adverse effects attributable to them. As a result, in Dr. Kolchak’s view, it is likely that Mr. Perignon’s ability to foresee the consequences of his actions was at least to some degree impaired by the effects of those medications.
 

Dr. Lu was more categorical in his opinion. His report contains the following assertions: … [Mr. Perignon] was certain to be in a state of impaired mental awareness, and more likely, he was [in] an altered sleep state. More likely than not, he was in a state of complex sleep related behaviours. As such, Mr. Perignon would not be aware of his actions nor be able to form basic intent.
 
 Dr. Lu added that his opinion in that regard was bolstered by the fact that Mr. Perignon’s condition had stabilised after he discontinued his opioid consumption and went back on bromazepam. That sequence of events was, in his view, “highly consistent” with the conclusion that Mr. Perignon was suffering from severe sleep disorder at the time of the alleged offence.
 
 The Crown adduced no expert evidence. IV.



The Legal Framework
 
 There is also no dispute between the parties about the applicable law. Although not contentious, the legal framework is complicated by the fact that, after the evidence was concluded, but before I received closing arguments, the Supreme Court of Canada struck down former s. 33.1 of the Criminal Code as unconstitutional: see R. v. Brown, 2022 SCC 18. That provision had operated, in cases involving crimes of violence of the kind in issue here, to render the defence of automatism unavailable in certain circumstances. Since then, Parliament has enacted a replacement provision, but the parties agree that it does not apply retroactively to this case. 
 

The outcome of this case therefore turns on whether Mr. Perignon has satisfied the common law test for automatism. The nature of and rationale for the defence was explained by Kasirer J. writing for the court in Brown, as follows at paras. 46-8:
 
The defence of automatism denies the element of voluntariness and therefore negates the actus reus of the offence (R. v. Chaulk, 1990 CanLII 34 (SCC), 3 S.C.R. 1303, at p. 1321; R. v. Parks, 1992 CanLII 78 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 871, at p. 896). Involuntary conduct is understood to be genuinely exculpatory because, while the prohibited act was harmful, the accused lacks the capacity to answer for what they did (J. Gardner, Offences and Defences: Selected Essays in the Philosophy of Criminal Law (2007), at p. 142). A physically involuntary act, however wrongful in outward appearance, is not a guilty act that can be imputed to an accused.
 
Automatism is reflected in involuntary movements that may be associated with heart attacks, seizures or “external” shock, or conditions such as sleepwalking or delirium, where the body moves but there is no link between mind and body (Bratty v. Attorney-General for Northern Ireland, A.C. 386 (H.L.), at p. 409; Rabey, at p. 523). Physical voluntariness is a principle of fundamental justice and a requirement of all true criminal offences, central to the criminal law’s desire to avoid convicting the morally innocent (Daviault, at p. 74; R. v. Ruzic, 2001 SCC 24, 1 S.C.R. 687, at paras. 46‑47; R. v. Bouchard-Lebrun, 2011 SCC 58, 3 S.C.R. 575, at para. 45). Absent a willed movement of the body, the Crown cannot prove the actus reus beyond a reasonable doubt (R. v. Théroux, 1993 CanLII 134 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 5, at pp. 17‑18). This is distinguished from moral involuntariness, which describes scenarios where the accused retains conscious control over their body but has no realistic choice but to commit a guilty act (Ruzic, at para. 44).
 
In addition, an automaton cannot form the mens rea, or guilty mind, if their actions are involuntary. Where an accused has no conscious awareness of their movements, they necessarily cannot intend their involuntary acts. Imposing criminal liability in the absence of proof of fault also offends the principles of fundamental justice (Motor Vehicle Reference, at pp. 513‑15).
 
 Under the formal test that has developed based on those principles, an accused seeking to rely on the defence must meet both an evidentiary and a persuasive burden: R. v. Antonius, 2020 BCSC 1360.
 
 With respect to the former, before the accused can raise the defence before a jury, he must: a)
 assert that his act was involuntary; and b)
 adduce logically probative evidence from a qualified expert supporting the claim, upon which a properly instructed jury could find that the impugned act was involuntary. 
 
 In assessing whether the accused has met the second branch of that test, the court is to consider all of the relevant circumstances. Some of the factors that will bear on the analysis were listed by Bastarache J., writing for the majority, in R. v. Stone, 1999 CanLII 688 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 290, as follows, at para. 192: a)
 the severity of the triggering stimulus; b)
 corroborating evidence of bystanders; c)
 corroborating medical history of automatistic-like dissociative states; d)
 whether there is evidence of a motive for the crime; and e)
 whether the alleged trigger of the automatism is also the victim of the automatistic violence.
 
 In this case, the Crown concedes, and I agree, that Mr. Perignon has met the threshold burden so as to justify putting the defence to a jury. Because I am sitting in this case as a judge alone without a jury, I will consider those factors and others in greater detail when I consider whether Mr. Perignon has met his persuasive burden to show that his act was indeed an involuntary one.
 
 Before addressing that question, a second preliminary issue arises as to whether it is “mental disorder automatism” or “non-mental disorder automatism” that should be left with the trier of fact in the circumstances of this case. That issue turns on whether the condition asserted by Mr. Perignon to explain his conduct can be identified as a mental disorder, in which case different consequences will follow: Stone at paras. 193-222. There are two principal considerations that bear on the analysis in that regard: 
a)
 the “internal-cause” factor (that is, whether an otherwise normal person might have entered into an automatonic state in similar circumstances); and b)
 the “continuing danger” factor, which focuses on the risk to public safety. 
 
 Here too, the Crown concedes, and I agree, that the question to be answered in this case concerns non-mental disorder automatism exclusively. Both Dr. Kolchak and Dr. Lu testified that in their view, the mix of medications and alcohol that Mr. Perignon consumed on the date of the alleged offence were such as to create the potential for automatonic behaviour, independent of any mental disorder. Conversely, there was no basis in the evidence to support a conclusion that Mr. Perignon’s conduct was attributable to any ongoing mental disorder. 
 
 The only issue upon which the parties disagree, and on which the outcome of the case therefore turns, is whether Mr. Perignon has met his legal or persuasive burden to demonstrate that his conduct was indeed involuntary, due to non-mental disorder automatism. It is to that ultimate question that I now turn. V.


 
Analysis
 
 Defence counsel argues that the evidence strongly supports the conclusion that Mr. Perignon’s act was involuntary. He refers to several of the Stone factors, emphasizing the lack of any apparent motive for Mr. Perignon’s conduct and the strong support for the defence theory that is to be found in the reports and testimony of the two psychiatrists. Defence counsel submits that Mr. Perignon himself was a credible witness, noting that his version of events was corroborated in several respects by independent evidence, particularly that of the Crown witnesses and the PharmaNet records.
 
 Although Crown counsel disputes that the defence has met its burden, he concedes that this case is “close to the line”. He also concedes that there was no apparent motive for the stabbing and that the trigger for that act, if there was one, appears to lie in the pattern of Mr. Perignon’s consumption of prescription medications and alcohol. Nevertheless, Crown counsel argues that the preponderance of the Stone factors tilts in favour of conviction. In urging that conclusion, Crown counsel emphasized the following factors: a)
 Mr. Perignon was not a credible witness, inasmuch as his capacity to remember important details was suspiciously selective; and b)
 assuming Mr. Perignon consumed the zopiclone tablets at 10 pm, as he testified, there would not have been enough time between then and the stabbing for the effects of the zopiclone to be felt, given that the stabbing had already occurred by 10:09, when he made the 911 call.
 
 One difficulty I have with the Crown’s submission is that the Stone factors are not intended to be exhaustive, nor are they intended to be a tally, with the outcome turning on how many of them favour one result or the other. Each factor will assume different degrees of importance in different cases. 
 
 Here, the lack of both a motive and an obvious trigger figures prominently in the analysis. I say this because Mr. Perignon’s act is very difficult to explain in any way other than as the defence urges. Not only was there no argument between Mr. and Ms. Perignon in the leadup to the incident, they had their children staying with them in the house that weekend. I am left with no explanation as to why Mr. Perignon, if he was indeed acting intentionally, would have chosen that moment in particular to attack his wife. Conversely, the fact that he immediately called 911 and was evidently anxious for help to arrive quickly, tends to negate the suggestion that he consciously intended to cause her harm at any stage.
 
 I appreciate that the case must turn to a large degree on Mr. Perignon’s own credibility. Ultimately, he is the only one who can directly attest to his internal experience that night. As Crown counsel argues, his account was not without its problems, particularly where it was self-serving and not supported by other evidence. A central example of this can be seen in his description of the instructions he claims to have received from Dr. White. That aspect of his case could have been bolstered by confirmatory testimony from Dr. White himself, although I am not prepared, as Crown counsel urges, to draw an adverse inference against Mr. Perignon for failing to call him. Inherent in the defence that was raised was an element of criticism directed at Dr. White for the care he provided in the leadup to the incident. The PharmaNet records go a long way to filling that gap in any event.
 
 Nor am I prepared to make much of the minor inconsistencies in Mr. Perignon’s previous statements, such as his apparent confusion over whether he had made a note on a piece of paper that his dosage of zopiclone had risen to 3.5 tablets, or his ability to recall certain details over others. The testimony of the psychiatrists adequately explained how his impaired state of mind could have caused his memory to behave in that manner. While it is certainly strange that his memory became suddenly clear when he called 911, the psychiatrists explained that the sound of Ms. Perignon’s screams, coupled with the shock of the scene laid out before him, could have startled him into a more awake state.
 
 Having regard to some of the other Stone factors, it is noteworthy that Ms. Perignon thought that Mr. Perignon’s behaviour and appearance was particularly strange at dinner that evening. On the other hand, Mr. Perignon had no previous history of complex sleep behaviours or dissociative states. That being said, there was evidence of his having slept through Christmas day after taking baclofen in 2016. More importantly, the medical evidence suggested that the side effects of zopiclone were capable of being idiopathic – that is, they could well have appeared out of nowhere, especially if, as was claimed to be the case here, the medication was being taken in escalating doses. What is equally important here, in my view, is the fact that Mr. Perignon had no history of violence either. 
 
 Another line of evidence that is argued by the Crown to undermine the defence theory arises from some of the remarks that Mr. Perignon is recorded to have made that night, suggesting that, contrary to his testimony at trial, he had in fact been awake throughout. Dr. Kolchak himself was troubled by Mr. Perignon’s statement to the police, when told that he was being held for attempted murder, that he did not intend to murder his wife but only to hurt her. He told the 911 dispatcher that what he had inflicted on his wife was “not a killing wound.” Towards the end of the 911 call, Mr. Perignon can be heard, as he was being taken into custody, stating to those present that he “just did something really stupid.” How could he have said those things, Crown counsel argues, had he not been fully aware at the time of his actions and intentions.
 
 I accept that these statements could be taken to connote an intact memory and intentional conduct. However, it was never put to Mr. Perignon in cross-examination that he acted intentionally. In any event, the more compelling inference to be drawn is that he was, in making those statements, reconstructing events to explain what had occurred, without having actually experienced it consciously. One of the most important pieces of evidence supporting that exculpatory inference arises from the response he gave when he was asked by the 911 dispatcher where the knife was. He answered that he had thrown it on the floor. What he could not have known at the time was that Ms. Perignon would later remember removing the knife from her back herself. Indeed, she had, in doing so, sustained a cut to her thumb that later required stitches. That evidence strongly suggests that Mr. Perignon, in his confusion, was trying to weave together a coherent narrative to explain what had just occurred, rather than relating real memories.
 
 As Crown counsel argues, the defence theory is also undermined to some extent by the apparent timing of Mr. Perignon’s consumption of zopiclone in relation to the stabbing. The psychiatric evidence was that zopiclone would have to have been the essential ingredient in bringing about a somnambulistic state, with the opioids and alcohol contributing but not capable of doing so on their own. Dr. Kolchak noted in his report that it was surprising that the medications, if indeed they had had that effect, would have worn off sufficiently to render Mr. Perignon as alert as he appeared to be when he was taken into custody. However, both psychiatrists testified in cross-examination that it was possible, if unlikely, for the zopiclone to have taken effect in the few minutes available, assuming the timing was indeed as reconstructed by Crown counsel. 
 
 Regardless of whether those few minutes could suffice for that purpose, I am not persuaded that the available window necessarily had to be less than ten minutes, as Crown counsel’s argument assumes. That timing is based on Mr. Perignon’s statement to the police, a few days later, that he believed he had taken the zopiclone at precisely 10 pm because he looked at the clock in his bedroom when he did so, intending to fall asleep by 11 pm. However, it is possible that either the clock itself, his memory of the event, or both, were inaccurate. Other witnesses who were present gave differing accounts as to the timing of events that night. For example, both Kaitlin Perignon and Mr. Dunsford recalled hearing screams at 10:30 pm. Rochelle Perignon recalled looking at her cell phone after hearing screams at 10:04 or 10:05 pm.
 
 Taking the evidence as a whole, as I must, I have concluded that Mr. Perignon was, at a minimum, operating in a severely impaired state of mind at the material time. Although it is possible that he acted intentionally despite that impairment, the more likely explanation for his conduct is that it was entirely involuntary because it occurred while he was effectively asleep. In other words, I am satisfied on a balance of probabilities that the offence with which Mr. Perignon stands charged was not a voluntary act but was committed while he was in a state of non-mental disorder automatism. VI.



Summary and Conclusion
 
 Having been satisfied that Mr. Perignon did not act voluntarily when he committed the act of which he is accused, I find him not guilty. 
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/sc/2023bcsc85.html
 


THE COURT: These are my oral reasons for judgment with respect to the sentencing of Mr. Ravin Dugas. This follows Mr. Dugas's guilty plea on two offences on April 12, 2022, before another member of this Court. Specifically, on April 12, 2022, Mr. Dugas pled guilty to two counts on the relevant indictment: namely the possession of fentanyl for the purpose of trafficking contrary to s. 5(2) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, and possession of a loaded prohibited or restricted firearm, contrary to s. 95(1) of the Criminal Code.
 


Given the length of these reasons and the fact that, with the consent of both counsel for Mr. Dugas and the Crown, they are being delivered by videoconference, I am going to order that a transcript of them be prepared for the benefit of counsel and Mr. Dugas at the request and expense of the Court. Circumstance of the offences
 


The circumstance of the offences can be generally described as follows.
 


On December 4, 2019, Mr. Dugas was a person experiencing homelessness, who resided without a fixed address in or about Vernon, British Columbia. Mr. Dugas at this time was struggling with addiction issues. He was walking down the street at approximately 11:00 in the morning in what is described as an agitated state. His behaviour caught the attention of a civilian who had had no prior contact or interactions with Mr. Dugas. They made eye contact and this further agitated Mr. Dugas. Mr. Dugas made some comment to the effect of, "what are you looking at?" and then proceeded to reach into the front pocket of a distinctively coloured hooded sweatshirt he was wearing and pulled out the butt of a handgun. He flashed the civilian with the butt of the handgun, but it is conceded that the barrel of the handgun remained in the front pocket of his sweatshirt and was not fully brandished. There was no further interaction between Mr. Dugas and the civilian and no violence ensued. The civilian, however, contacted the RCMP and they promptly attended. 
 


There are somewhat differing accounts of the events presented by the Crown and defence on when Mr. Dugas disposed of the handgun, either prior to arrest, namely was he approached by the responding officers or shortly after. I do not consider this to be a material issue, given that it is conceded that Mr. Dugas disposed of the subject firearm, a loaded 9mm semiautomatic handgun, in the snow in the parking lot or possibly storage compound of a local mechanics shop and it was located shortly thereafter by the police. The fact that it was Mr. Dugas who disposed of the weapon was confirmed by video surveillance obtained subsequently. Mr. Dugas did not resist arrest.
 


When being searched incidental to arrest, a satchel that Mr. Dugas was wearing was specifically searched. In that satchel was the following: 
•

 
approximately 59.05 grams of fentanyl in a single bag; 
•

 
approximately 18.96 grams of cocaine in a single bag; 
•

 
approximately 42.39 grams of phenacetin, an agent commonly used to cut cocaine; 
•

 
approximately 159 tablets of benzodiazepine, an agent commonly used to cut fentanyl; 
•

 
a digital scale which was found to be contaminated with fentanyl, cocaine, and methamphetamine; •

 
a small amount of methamphetamine with a pipe, consistent with being for personal use; 
•

 
a further handgun magazine with ammunition consistent for use with the above‑noted 9mm semiautomatic handgun which was used in the incident with the civilian.
 


Based upon the evidence presented, the total amount of the fentanyl and cocaine seized was between $5800 and $13,680, depending upon how it was trafficked, namely in bulk or on a street level. 
Circumstances of Mr. Dugas
 


Turning to the circumstances of Mr. Dugas, in addition to the helpful submissions of counsel, I had the benefit of a Gladue report dated September 12, 2022, and a presentence report which was filed June 10, 2022. From my review of those reports, I note the following for the purposes of establishing my ultimate conclusion on sentencing. 
 


Mr. Dugas is 29 years of age at present. He would have thus been 26 years of age at the time of the two offences in December of 2019. 
 
 Mr. Dugas identifies as an Indigenous person with ties to the Cherokee Nation on his paternal side. For reasons I will set out, he is disconnected from most of his family and does not presently have connections with his Indigenous traditions or culture. Mr. Dugas's late grandfather, where his Aboriginal identification arises from, also apparently did not have much opportunity to connect with his Indigenous traditions or culture. Mr. Dugas never met his paternal grandfather as he passed away when Mr. Dugas was only six years of age. He was able to spend some limited time with his now‑deceased paternal grandmother, and reports those limited interactions as positive, saying she was a "good lady". 
 
 Going back in the chronology, Mr. Dugas's parents separated when he was extremely young, perhaps as young as three months or as late as six months, following his father being involved in a car accident. His contact with his father was very limited thereafter during his childhood, not even truly meeting him after infanthood until age seven. They have reconnected in some fashion during adulthood and Mr. Bouwie, Mr. Dugas's father, participated in the Gladue report interviews. Mr. Dugas's mother did not participate, on the specific instruction of Mr. Dugas. He reports that they have been estranged with some only rare contact for some 11 years, and recent efforts in the last year to build a bridge forward were not successful. She is also apparently terminally ill.
 
 Mr. Dugas reports that after separation between his biological parents, his mother then re‑partnered on multiple occasions. This resulted in Mr. Dugas having three half‑siblings. One of his mother's partners is noted to have been a positive support for Mr. Dugas and someone who he identifies as a stepfather. He also had positive support from the same former partner's parents whom he identifies as his grandparents. Other subsequent romantic relationships that ensued starting when Mr. Dugas was around or about age seven, particularly with two individuals who I will simply refer to as W. and R., were not positive and there was violence in the household.
 
 Mr. Dugas reports that he struggled during these times to have his basic needs as a child met, such as proper food and clothing, when in the care of his mother. At approximately age eight, Mr. Dugas reports that he was sexually assaulted by a male neighbour. It appears there was apparently some police intervention and he was interviewed. This is an example, as I will refer to below, where there is a key difference between the Gladue report and the presentence report. The Gladue report states that Mr. Dugas was interviewed but nothing further was done to protect Mr. Dugas, other than him not spending time with this adult male neighbour again.
 
 In the presentence report, it is stated that these events resulted in charges and Mr. Dugas had to provide a victim impact statement. The latter scenario would mean there was a conviction for an offence by this individual against Mr. Dugas and that there was a sentencing hearing, effectively akin to the one that has proceeded before me today. Neither the author of the Gladue report or the presentence report was cross-examined and counsel did not address this contradiction in the evidence in their submissions. However, if there was actually a criminal conviction arising from these offences, I expect that would have been specifically brought to the court's attention. 
 
 Having regard to the circumstances, I am inclined to accept the recitation of the events in the Gladue report, which is more comprehensive, as more accurate and this matter did not proceed beyond an investigative stage. This is not to say I do not accept Mr. Dugas's self‑report that these incidents occurred, but I have concluded that the presentence report author may have misunderstood or mischaracterized how this issue was dealt with.
 
 Ultimately, the family situation for Mr. Dugas became untenable and the Ministry of Children and Family Development, or the equivalent as it may have been called at that time, removed Mr. Dugas from his mother's care at the age of 12.
 
 Mr. Dugas had behavioural challenges after the removal from his mother's care, including some criminal activity, resulting in him having to leave the care of his mother's prior partner who, as noted, had been a positive support and was willing to take on the care of Mr. Dugas after he was removed. After a relatively brief time at a group home, Mr. Dugas connected with a family who offered to assume the role of his foster parents. They were very positive supports. Although Mr. Dugas is not in regular contact with these two individuals, he describes them in very good terms and indicates that their door is always open and he can call them at any time.
 
 I make this final observation for the purposes of highlighting that it does not appear that Mr. Dugas's removal by the Ministry, as I will refer to it, was the root of his slide into addiction and ultimately criminality. Rather, his living situation seems to have significantly improved after his removal, but the path he was on had unfortunately already been set and, even with these positive supports, they did not seem enough to change that path.
 
 In this regard, Mr. Dugas reports that he started using crack, heroin, and methamphetamines at around age 16. The drug use escalated by age 17. He started selling drugs, as I will colloquially refer to them, at 19 after choosing, on his own accord, to move out of his foster parents' home despite their positive supports. 
 
 In light of these circumstances and his other family situation, Mr. Dugas did not graduate from high school and has a Grade 10 education only.
 
 Although it appears that Mr. Dugas was generally involved in active addiction and possibly the trafficking of controlled substances between ages 19 and 25, his criminal record during that period of time is not extensive. There is actually a significant break in that record from in or about 2011 to in or about 2015, and even that 2015 offence resulted in a guilty plea to what is commonly referred to as simple possession of a controlled substance and a modest $200 fine. It is my understanding that Mr. Dugas did have sporadic temporary employment during this time which generally involved a manual labour component, such as landscaping, construction, and rebar work. 
 
 At age 25, his former stepfather, the individual I referred to above as generally being a positive support, helped obtain employment for Mr. Dugas as an insulator. He held that employment for approximately six months, and he reported in the Gladue report, he enjoyed the work and his coworkers. It was a prosocial environment generally. After he left that employment, Mr. Dugas returned to selling controlled substances and a non‑prosocial lifestyle. 
 
 In fairly close proximity to these offences, Mr. Dugas reports a traumatic event involving the death of a close friend who was also immersed in active addiction and involved in the trafficking of controlled substances. The reason for the significance of this event to Mr. Dugas, beyond just the loss of a close friend, was that he was supposed to meet this friend on the evening and instead had dinner and went to sleep at what I will refer to as his stepfather's home. In his absence, the friend overdosed and it appears may not have had anyone with him at that time to call for assistance or administer NARCAN. This was understandably upsetting for Mr. Dugas.
 
 As I will return to, Mr. Dugas is still a relatively youthful individual, and there is still absolutely an opportunity to now take the time to right the path towards a prosocial life. The question for this Court is how long should Mr. Dugas be incarcerated as a result of the two guilty pleas on the indictment before being given the opportunity to return to the community and demonstrate that he can live a prosocial life free from the scourge of addiction, which clearly appears to have been plaguing him at the time of these offences.
 
 Turning to the presentence report, it is mostly consistent with the Gladue report with some identifiable differences, as already alluded to above. For example, in the presentence report, it is noted that Mr. Dugas's parents separated when he was six months old and not three months old. This is clearly not a fact that Mr. Dugas would have personal recollection of, and this modest difference is not material to the fact that Mr. Dugas did not have a relationship with his biological father during his youth until seven years of age, and it was very limited contact thereafter. Similarly, in the Gladue report it is indicated that his mother was 16 years old at the time of his birth and 17 in the presentence report. As with the above, I do not find these inconsistencies to be material or relevant.
 
 However, a notable difference between the Gladue report and the presentence report is that the presentence report states that Mr. Dugas went to live with his biological father in Mission, British Columbia, in 2021, with the belief that this arrangement would be supportive, but it only lasted for approximately one-and-a-half months after his father reported him to the police (or possibly his bail supervisor) regarding an outstanding warrant. The result of this is that Mr. Dugas has been in custody since, as I understand, August 16, 2020. This may be potentially explained by the portion of the presentence report that reports that after having been abstinent from using drugs for some four-and-a-half months or thereabouts while in initial pretrial detention, he started using methamphetamines in April of 2020 after his judicial interim release. 
 
 I also do note that there are two fairly important facts in the presentence report regarding Mr. Dugas's relationship with his mother which are not noted in the Gladue report, the most significant being that he is bound by no‑contact conditions with his mother, and I quote, "due to his behaviour at her home," as set out at page 2 of the report. This is said to have occurred after a period of "two to three years of estrangement." This period of estrangement is substantially different than what is described in the Gladue report and the Court infers that these no‑contact conditions are quite likely related to his criminal record entered into evidence for the purposes of these sentencing proceedings, which show subsequent convictions post these offences when he was released and before he returned to pretrial detention.
 
 The presentence report is also inconsistent with the Gladue report in that it reports that Mr. Dugas says it is difficult to relate to his father and that he has no contact with his stepfather. The former issue is the most significant for the Court given, as I will state below, that Mr. Dugas's apparent plan for obtaining employment and being prosocial involves the positive support of his biological father.
 
 The presentence report is consistent as it relates to the positive support, albeit from time to time due to his circumstances and other challenges, from his former foster family. Mr. Dugas could not identify any other prosocial connections in terms of friendships or romantic relationships.
 
 Mr. Dugas also reports having been diagnosed with attention hyperactivity disorder. This is not confirmed other than by self‑reporting. The Court does take judicial notice that this disorder, if confirmed, can result in impulsivity and a difficulty in regulating self‑control. The Gladue report notes effectively the same at page 7 of the report.
 
 Returning to my earlier comments about Mr. Dugas being a relatively youthful offender with a genuine chance for rehabilitation, I note that Mr. Dugas does have some plan to right the path as set out in the Gladue report, which is specifically to relocate after his release to live in or about Mission, British Columbia, to be closer to his biological father, and his father has indicated that he will assist Mr. Dugas in finding employment. Mr. Dugas himself recognizes the benefits of being employed - it keeps him busy and it gives him a purpose. I have absolutely no doubt that steady employment would be beneficial. The inconsistencies in the two reports regarding the state of Mr. Dugas's relationship with his biological father are of some genuine concern as I have addressed above. 
 
 However, I ultimately accept that these challenges in the relationship are substantially the product of their limited ability to fulsomely form a bond while Mr. Dugas was a child or a young adolescent, and so there are tenuous aspects of the relationship as a product of what I will describe as the fractured nature of Mr. Dugas's upbringing. In reaching that conclusion, I accept that Mr. Dugas's father, Mr. Bouwie, seems sincerely interested in assisting Mr. Dugas, and that the relationship may have the opportunity to form a more solid foundation once Mr. Dugas is no longer incarcerated and hopefully does not return to active addiction.
 
 The final factual point I will address is that Mr. Dugas did take the opportunity to address the Court at the sentencing hearing. He expressed remorse for his conduct resulting in the guilty pleas, which I accept is genuine. One aspect of Mr. Dugas's address which gave me some pause was his request for a sentence that would allow him to remain outside of a federal penitentiary, as he has been apparently informed by others that controlled substances are more readily available in federal penitentiary, and so he would like to avoid a sentence which places him in such an institution. Leaving aside the obvious concern about the availability of controlled substances generally to individuals incarcerated, whether in provincial or federal institutions, the practical reality is that controlled substances will inevitably be available to Mr. Dugas upon his release from incarceration. In order to lead a prosocial life, Mr. Dugas needs to seek the necessary help to address the issues which are the root of his substance use and misuse. It is not a solution simply to reduce his access to controlled substances while in custody, as suggested. As such, I have not taken this particular portion of Mr. Dugas's address to the Court in consideration as part of my sentencing. The law
 

As a starting point, s. 718 of the Criminal Code provides as follows regarding the purposes of sentencing: 718 The fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society and to contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions that have one or more of the following objectives: (a) to denounce unlawful conduct and the harm done to victims or to the community that is caused by unlawful conduct; (b) to deter the offender and other persons from committing offences; (c) to separate offenders from society, where necessary; (d) to assist in rehabilitating offenders; (e) to provide reparations for harm done to victims or to the community; and (f) to promote a sense of responsibility in offenders, and acknowledgment of the harm done to victims or to the community. 
 

The fundamental principle that is set out in s. 718.1 provides that: 718.1
A sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.
 
 In terms of other sentencing principles, the relevant provisions of s. 718.2 mandate that a sentence should be increased or decreased to account for any relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances of the offender. I will not read in the entirety of s. 718.2 into the record, but I have considered the principles set out therein by the Criminal Code, including the dangers of fentanyl and the dangers of prohibited weapons, Mr. Dugas's limited criminal record, Mr. Dugas's guilty plea, Mr. Dugas's expression of remorse and, importantly, the relevance of the Gladue factors.
 

On a broad level, the majority of the Supreme Court of Canada set out in R. v. Nur, 2015 SCC 15, that the fundamental principle in sentencing is reaching a proportionate sentence that balances the gravity of the offence and the degree of the responsibility of the offender. I will again not read them extensively into the record, but paragraph 42 of Nur is particularly relevant in this regard:
 
In reconciling these different goals, the fundamental principle of sentencing under s. 718.1 of the Criminal Code is that “[a] sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.”
 

In a similar vein, the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64, directs that sentences are to be crafted in a way that takes into consideration the moral blameworthiness of the offender and sentences given to offenders in similar circumstances. I specifically make note of paragraph 53 of Lacasse:
 
This inquiry must be focused on the fundamental principle of proportionality stated in s. 718.1 of the Criminal Code, which provides that a sentence must be "proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender". A sentence will therefore be demonstrably unfit if it constitutes an unreasonable departure from this principle. Proportionality is determined both on an individual basis, that is, in relation to the accused him or herself and to the offence committed by the accused, and by comparison with sentences imposed for similar offences committed in similar circumstances. Individualization and parity of sentences must be reconciled for a sentence to be proportionate: s. 718.2(a) and (b) of the Criminal Code.
 
 Turning now to sentencing on what I will describe as fentanyl offences specifically. 
 
 In 2007, our Court of Appeal in British Columbia rendered a decision in R. v. Smith, 2017 BCCA 112. This, as I will return to, was more recently considered again and confirmed in R. v. Ellis, 2022 BCCA 278. Smith sets out a proposed range of sentencing for what is described as "street level" trafficking in fentanyl, which begins at 18 months and extends to 36 months, and even upward of that where appropriate. 
 
 There is case law which I was referred to by counsel which attempted to distinguish between street‑level trafficking and mid‑level trafficking. As I frankly stated to counsel during submissions in this regard, the difficulty with cases like this is that possession of controlled substances does not necessarily fit into an exact category. 
 
 Mr. Dugas clearly had more controlled substances in his possession than was plausible that he could have been individually selling. He conceded this through his guilty plea. Although he had a scale and cutting agents, he had no individual bags to package the substances, no score sheets, and no cash. He is clearly thus not just a plain street‑level trafficker. He also had a weapon, which will be addressed in the conviction for the second offence but is, in and of itself, somewhat inconsistent with street‑level trafficking, as individuals in those circumstances generally do not carry a quantity of controlled substances which put them at particular risk of theft or robbery, which I understand is the rationale presented for why Mr. Dugas had the prohibited weapon in the first place.
 
 However, balancing these factors on the other end of the spectrum is that Mr. Dugas was a person experiencing homelessness, was actively using drugs himself, and again in possession of no cash, or at least any material cash such that it is not noted in any of the circumstances. Importantly, no cash, not just on his person but apparently at all generally, given that he was homeless. This would appear to suggest that the controlled substances were provided to him by a third party for sale in some fashion, in return for Mr. Dugas obtaining drugs for his own personal use, and possibly some other remuneration, the amount of which is clearly unknown and will never be determined by the court given the guilty plea. But I again reiterate it is not contested that Mr. Dugas was homeless at the time of these two offences and that no significant or notable cash was found on his person at the time of his arrest. All he had in his possession of significance were the controlled substances and, of course, the handgun which he had disposed of nearby.
 
 Further, the ranges are not a straitjacket, it is always an individual analysis. 
 
 I ultimately concede, however, that to the extent it is necessary for the purposes of these reasons to plot this offence on a range for the purposes of sentencing, that Mr. Dugas hovers closer to a mid‑level trafficker than a simple street‑level trafficker, but again reiterate that the role of this Court is to ultimately determine a fit sentence, having regard to the circumstances, the case law, and the Gladue factors which I will return to.
 
 Returning to the law and consistent with the foregoing, no specifically set range has been established to date by our Court of Appeal in this province with respect to the trafficking of fentanyl beyond street level. There are some decisions which impose or uphold sentences between four to five years, and some cases which impose or uphold sentences of upwards of eight to 10 years. 
 
 The Supreme Court of Canada also fairly recently issued a decision providing guidance on the principles for higher‑level fentanyl trafficking cases in R. v. Parranto, 2021 SCC 46. 
 
 Parranto is highly distinguishable from a factual perspective, save for the fact that the controlled substance being trafficked was fentanyl. Specifically, Parranto involved what was conceded to be "wholesale commercial trafficking". The Crown in this case does not even purport to suggest that Mr. Dugas was engaged in the commercial trafficking of controlled substances. However, there are key principles from Parranto which are applicable, which I will set out below.
 

Specifically, I refer to paragraph 36 of Parranto, which states that the key principles of sentencing can be summarized as follows: 1.


Starting points and ranges are not and cannot be binding in theory or in practice (Friesen, at para. 36); 2.


Ranges and starting points are "guidelines, not hard and fast rules", and a "departure from or failure to refer to a range of sentence or starting point" cannot be treated as an error in principle (Friesen, at para. 37); 3.


Sentencing judges have discretion to "individualize sentencing both in method and outcome", and "[d]ifferent methods may even be required to account properly for relevant systemic and background factors" (Friesen, at para. 38, citing Ipeelee, at para. 59); and 4.


Appellate courts cannot "intervene simply because the sentence is different from the sentence that would have been reached had the range of sentence or starting point been applied" . . . The focus should be on whether the sentence was fit and whether the judge properly applied the principles of sentencing, not whether the judge chose the right starting point or category (Friesen, at para. 162).
 

Further, paragraph 40 of Parranto provides guidance to trial judges or sentencing judges, as in this case, as to how to draft reasons to allow an appellate court, if necessary, to discern whether the sentence is fit in light of the principles and objectives in the Criminal Code. Specifically, paragraph 40 states as follows:
 
Most particularly, and irrespective of the modality used, the trial judge's reasons and the record must demonstrate why the sentence is proportionate to the moral blameworthiness of the offender and the gravity of the offence. This may involve adopting appellate guidance such as this Court's comments in Friesen on the harms of the offence. Quantitative appellate guidance may also be part of the jurisprudential background informing the gravity of the offence. As noted, it is not an error in principle for the sentencing judge to fail to refer to a starting point. Since starting points and ranges reflect the gravity of the offence, however, the sentencing judge's reasons and the record must allow the reviewing court to understand why the sentence is proportionate despite a significant departure from the range or starting point. This applies regardless of whether the reasons refer to the starting point or not. At the very least, the appellate court must be able to discern from the reasons and the record why the sentence is fit in the circumstances of the offence and the offender. We emphasize, however, that it is inappropriate for appellate courts to "artificially constrain sentencing judges' ability to impose a proportionate sentence" by requiring "exceptional circumstances" when departing from a range (Friesen, at paras. 111-12; R. v. Burnett, 2017 MBCA 122, 358 C.C.C. (3d) 123, at para. 26). Departing from a range or starting point is appropriate where required to achieve proportionality.
 

I shall further refer to the comments of Justice Moldaver and Côté at paragraphs 93 to 101 of Parranto. As noted above, I accept and it is acknowledged by counsel that Parranto is highly factually distinguishable. Indeed, in this regard, I note that paragraph 99 of Parranto specifically says that the comments do not apply for sentences for street‑level trafficking or where traffickers are motivated by a need to support their own addiction. However, the general principles from the Supreme Court of Canada are still applicable and I consider them appropriate in the circumstances to read into the record, starting at paragraph 93:
 
As grave a threat as drugs such as heroin and cocaine pose, that threat pales in comparison to the one posed by fentanyl and its analogues. Indeed, over the past decade, fentanyl has altered the landscape of the substance abuse crisis in Canada, revealing itself as public enemy number one.
 
Synthetically produced and readily available on the illicit market, fentanyl is an extremely dangerous and powerful painkiller and sedative. As with other opioids, such as heroin and morphine, it is a highly addictive substance, which, when taken outside of controlled medical environments, puts its users at risk of serious harm, including brain damage, organ damage, coma, and death. Fentanyl's potential for harm is, however, significantly greater than other opioids. It is, for example, estimated to be 80‑100 times more potent than morphine and 25‑50 times more potent than pharmaceutical grade heroin. Given its strength, a lethal dose will often be less than two milligrams, an amount as small as a single grain of salt (R. v. Smith, 2016 BCSC 2148, 363 C.R.R. (2d) 365, at para. 24). The risk of overdose and death from fentanyl is thus extremely high, particularly for naïve users or where it is taken in combination with other substances, such as alcohol or other opioids. The risk of overdose is also one that can be difficult to guard against, as traffickers often surreptitiously mix small amounts of fentanyl with other substances to create a cheaper product with the same effects, thereby drastically increasing their profitability (H. Hrymak, “A Bad Deal: British Columbia’s Emphasis on Deterrence and Increasing Prison Sentences for Street‑Level Fentanyl Traffickers” (2018), 41 Man. L.J. 149, at p. 153). This deceptive practice leaves users vulnerable and unaware, especially as fentanyl is physically indistinguishable from other hard drugs, such as heroin, oxycodone, and cocaine (C. C. Ruby, Sentencing (10th ed. 2020); Smith, at para. 24; R. v. Joumaa, 2018 ONSC 317, at para. 12 (CanLII)).
 
 Analogues or derivatives of fentanyl further exacerbate the risks, as these substances can be far more potent than even fentanyl itself, with some estimated to be as much as 100 times more potent than fentanyl. One such analogue, carfentanil, is so toxic that it “has no safe or beneficial human use, even within the medical community in highly controlled environments” (A. Sabbadini and A. Boni, Sentencing Drug Offenders (loose-leaf), at s. 2:1600.10).
 
 Beyond its mere potential to cause harm, however, fentanyl has had — and continues to have — a real and deadly impact on the lives of Canadians. Indeed, trafficking in fentanyl is so deadly that various courts have described it as a national crisis, reflective of an increased understanding of the gravity of the harm it causes (see, e.g., R. v. Smith, 2017 BCCA 112, at para. 50 (CanLII); R. v. Vezina, 2017 ONCJ 775, at para. 58 (CanLII); R. v. Aujla, 2016 ABPC 272, at para. 1 (CanLII)). This heightened understanding is supported by the available statistical evidence. The expert evidence on the record before us establishes, for instance, that fentanyl‑related deaths in Alberta increased by 4,858 percent between 2011 and 2017, rising from 12 deaths in 2011 to 583 deaths in 2017. More broadly, federal statistics on opioid‑related deaths show that, between January 2016 and March 2021, approximately 23,000 Canadians lost their lives due to accidental apparent opioid‑related deaths, with fentanyl involved in 71 percent of these deaths (Special Advisory Committee on the Epidemic of Opioid Overdoses, Opioid and Stimulant-related Harms in Canada (September 2021) (online). The epidemic also shows no signs of abating, with over 6,000 accidental deaths occurring in 2020 alone, 82 percent of which involved fentanyl (Government of Canada, Federal actions on opioids to date (June 2021) (online)). These figures throw into stark relief the dark and inescapable reality that “[e]very day in our communities, fentanyl abuse claims the lives of Canadians” (R. v. Loor, 2017 ONCA 696, at para. 33 (CanLII)).
 
 The scale of fentanyl’s devastating impact becomes even more apparent when one considers that, between 2016 and 2020, there were approximately 3,400 homicides across Canada, a number far below the number of fentanyl‑related deaths (Statistics Canada, Table 35‑10‑0069‑01 — Number of homicide victims, by method used to commit the homicide, July 27, 2021 (online)). This disparity makes clear that, in a very real way, those individuals responsible for the largescale distribution of fentanyl within our communities are a source of far greater harm than even those responsible for the most violent of crimes.
 
 The time has thus come for our perception of the gravity of largescale trafficking in fentanyl to accord with the gravity of the crisis it has caused. Largescale trafficking in fentanyl is not a crime marked merely by the distribution and sale of an illicit substance; rather, it is a crime marked by greed and the pursuit of profit at the expense of violence, death, and the perpetuation of a public health crisis previously unseen in Canadian society. In many ways, “[t]rafficking in fentanyl is almost the equivalent of putting multiple bullets in the chambers of a revolver and playing Russian roulette. It is the most efficient killer of drug users on the market today” (R. v. Frazer, 2017 ABPC 116, 58 Alta. L.R. (6th) 185, at para. 11). Put simply, it is a crime that can be expected to not only destroy lives, but to undermine the very foundations of our society.
 
 My comments that follow do not apply to sentences for street-level trafficking, or where traffickers are motivated by a need to support their own addiction. Rather, the focus of this guidance is on the directing minds of largescale fentanyl trafficking operations.
In my view, heavy penitentiary sentences will be appropriate where offenders have trafficked in large quantities of fentanyl and assumed leadership roles in the trafficking operation. Indeed, in the context of largescale fentanyl trafficking operations, substantial sentences should be neither unusual nor reserved for exceptional circumstances. As this Court has previously explained, maximum sentences should not be reserved for the “abstract case of the worst crime committed in the worst circumstances”, but rather should be imposed whenever the circumstances warrant it (R. v. L.M., 2008 SCC 31, 2 S.C.R. 163, at para. 22; see also Friesen, at para. 114).
Ultimately, largescale trafficking in fentanyl is a crime that preys disproportionally on the misery of others — the marginalized and those whose lives are marked by hopelessness and despair. It is a crime motivated by greed and by a callous disregard for the untold grief and suffering it leaves in its wake. Above all, it is a crime that kills — often and indiscriminately. It follows, in my view, that what matters most is that those individuals who choose to prey on the vulnerable and profit from the misery of the Canadian public for personal gain are sentenced in accordance with the severity of the harms they have caused. Fentanyl trafficking, and largescale trafficking in particular, are a source of unspeakable harm. Accordingly, while the range of sentences currently imposed for the directing minds of largescale fentanyl operations straddles the upper single digits and lower double digits, sentencing judges should feel justified, where circumstances warrant, in applying a higher range, consisting of mid-level double digit sentences and, in particularly aggravating circumstances, potential sentences of life imprisonment.
 
 The last point is particularly apt given my conclusion that, although I find that the circumstances of this offence hover closer to mid‑level trafficking than street‑level trafficking, that is grounded in large part by my conclusion that Mr. Dugas was homeless and actively engaged himself in drug addiction at the time of the offence. It is entirely possible that another judge on another factual matrix involving a similar quantity of drugs, cutting agents, and a scale may definitively find an accused to be a mid‑level trafficker operating for profit rather than to support their own addiction. Nonetheless, the comments from the Supreme Court of Canada I referred to above are instructive and I have fulsomely taken them into consideration.
 
 The final authority I will refer to with respect to sentencing of the offence of possession of fentanyl for the purpose of trafficking is R. v. McLean, 2022 MBCA 60. 
 

This is a very recent Manitoba Court of Appeal case referred to by the Crown which considers and applies Parranto. In that case, the Court comprehensively reviewed the jurisprudence on the issue of sentencing in matters involving the trafficking of fentanyl and I will refer specifically to the following three paragraphs of that decision:
 
 While not a perfect paradigm, the distinctions of street-level, mid-level and high-level trafficking highlight the drug trade's chain of distribution beginning with the sourcing of the drug by either importation or domestic production through a series of transactions to its ultimate consumption. Street-level trafficking refers to activities focused on the back end of the chain of distribution—direct sale to drug users. Mid-level trafficking refers to the wholesale trade where one trafficker supplies another trafficker lower down the chain of distribution. This subset commonly has many layers of entrepreneurs. Finally, there is high-level trafficking, whose distinguishing attribute is the significant scale of the trafficking and, in particular, the quantity, purity or value of the drugs; the ability to obtain the drugs at their source; and/or the sophistication and organization of the drug operation. . . . 
The mere fact the accused had been convicted of the fentanyl and cocaine offences in relation to April 6, 2019 did not relieve the Crown from the criminal burden of proof in relation to aggravating factors relevant to the sentencing objectives of denunciation and deterrence [citing the Code and R. v. Angelillo, 2006 SCC 55]. . . . 
Based on a survey of 11 reported decisions from across Canada (including Petrowski), Brown and Martin JJ (on behalf of themselves and two other judges) commented that a national range of approximately "8 to 15 years" (at para 68) has arisen for those involved in the commercial wholesale trafficking of fentanyl in circumstances that would be considered to be mid-level or the beginning of high-level trafficking in Manitoba (see para. 68, 78). A careful review of those 11 decisions confirms that none deal with the situation of a mere courier. All of the cases involved independent dealers, the directing mind of a drug network or someone performing an important task in the [drug] trafficking activity with some decision-making authority or responsibility.
 
 Like with Parranto, the facts of McLean are distinguishable from those of the circumstances before the Court. There is no submission that Mr. Dugas was a mere courier. However, the analysis of the Manitoba Court of Appeal in that case, including the portion of the decision not specifically referred to in these oral reasons, are instructive.
 
 Ultimately, however, I return to my earlier point that the role of this Court is to fashion an appropriate sentence for these offences in accordance with the principles set forth in the Criminal Code, and which is appropriate in this particular factual matrix. This factual matrix includes the fact that Mr. Dugas has also pleaded guilty to the relevant weapons offence. 
 
 In that regard, I was referred to, amongst other cases, the decisions in R. v. Lee, 2018 BCCA 428, and R. v. Leach, 2019 BCCA 451. Again, the circumstances of these cases are distinguishable from the case at bar. Without being exhaustive, Mr. Leach had a prior conviction for manslaughter and Mr. Lee had substantially more fentanyl in his possession than Mr. Dugas. Mr. Lee also was apparently not homeless, as the seizure of his drugs is described in the reasons as being at "his apartment". 
 
 Although I recognize that these authorities are binding on this Court, I ultimately conclude that the circumstances in Leach are so distinguishable that they are of limited utility in this Court's role in determining an appropriate sentence for Mr. Dugas in accordance with the Criminal Code.
 

However, there are again principles which are relevant which the Court must consider. Specifically, I refer to paragraph 22 of Lee:
 
As the Crown emphasized, citing, among other authorities, Mann and R. v. Smith, 2017 BCCA 112, fentanyl is a scourge that imposes intolerable risks on society and sentences of four to six years' imprisonment have been imposed for offences involving trafficking in fentanyl alone. Similar sentences have also been imposed in cases involving substantial quantities of cocaine and methamphetamine: R. v. Francis, 2008 BCCA 309; R. v. Godbout, 2015 BCCA 168; Borecky. In addition, a three-year sentence for a firearm conviction in "true crime" circumstances is near the bottom of the appropriate range of sentences: R. v. Holt, 2015 BCCA 302; R. v. Kachuol, 2017 BCCA 292. In my view, considered against this backdrop, taking into account the circumstances of the offences and Mr. Lee's recent, related criminal record and prohibitions, the seven-year global sentence imposed by the judge is manifestly fit. I would not disturb it on appeal.
 
 The final case I will note is R. v. Racette, 2016 BCCA 275. Racette has much closer factual similarity to this case. In that case, the offender was Aboriginal and had a very difficult upbringing. He was also apprehended by effectively child and family services and placed in care. He also reported experiencing sexual abuse and started involvement with the correctional system at an early age. In this regard, I do note that Mr. Racette's criminal record is substantially more significant than Mr. Dugas's and includes a sexual assault conviction, in addition to drug‑related, and offences for failure to comply with court orders and property offences.
 

Paragraph 18 of Racette sets out this dynamic:
 
Given Mr. Racette's tragic background, defence counsel says the principles of proportionality and totality require careful attention. The systemic and background factors discussed in Gladue and Ipeelee plainly played a role in his offending behaviour, impacting his moral culpability and reducing his moral blameworthiness. It is notable in this regard, he says, that Mr. Racette's criminal record is mainly for property offences, which is consistent with drug and alcohol dependency, low education and possible [fetal alcohol spectrum disorder]. It is also notable that he has no prior drug offences and the trafficking involved an unsophisticated, relatively low-level drug sale to support a drug habit. Further, while his guilty plea was entered late, it is entitled to some weight as an expression of remorse and acceptance of responsibility.
 

In sentencing Mr. Racette, the Court of Appeal ultimately did not accept the sentencing judge's conclusions were legally supportable. Specifically, I will read into the record paragraphs 21 to 25 of that decision authored by Madam Justice Dickson of the Court of Appeal:
 
Despite defence counsel's helpful and focused submissions, I am not persuaded that, in all of the circumstances, a sentence of three months consecutive on the first dial-a-dope offence or four years on the possession of the loaded prohibited firearm offence would adequately address the sentencing principles of deterrence and denunciation and the need to protect the public. This is so even when all mitigating factors, including Mr. Racette's aboriginal heritage and background, are taken into account.
 
I accept that Mr. Racette's commission of the first dial-a-dope offence is related to his drug addiction and efforts to fuel it, which in turn is connected to his background, aboriginal heritage and all that entails. I further accept that these factors significantly reduce his moral blameworthiness. Were it not for these factors, given his extensive criminal record and the fact he was bound by a recognizance at the time, in my view it is likely a sentence well above the bottom of the usual range would be appropriate. When they are accounted for, I agree with Crown counsel that a sentence of six months imprisonment consecutive should be imposed.
 
I also agree with Crown counsel that a sentence of five years imprisonment is appropriate for the possession of a loaded prohibited firearm offence. Mr. Racette engaged in profoundly dangerous misconduct when, as a tool of his criminal trade, he carried a loaded sawed-off shotgun into a public place. The case law is clear. Weighty exemplary sentences should be imposed for crimes of this sort for purposes of public protection and as a reflection of our shared social values. While mitigating factors, including an offender's aboriginal heritage, are important and must also be considered, deterrence and denunciation remain at the fore.
 
Mr. Racette's extensive criminal history and the other aggravating factors identified distinguish his case from those cited by defence counsel. The impact of his aboriginal heritage on his moral blameworthiness goes only so far in helping to explain his decision to arm himself with a loaded sawed-off shotgun and carry it into a busy public place while in possession of methamphetamine for the purpose of trafficking. Further, in its absence, these circumstances combined with such an extensive criminal history and a firearms prohibition, would justify an even weightier custodial sentence. All things considered, in my view, a five year sentence appropriately balances the aggravating and mitigating circumstances and properly accounts for Mr. Racette's background and aboriginal heritage.
 
In sum, I consider a fit total sentence to be six years imprisonment, less two years credit, composed of: six months for trafficking in methamphetamine on October 24, 2013; five years consecutive for possession of a loaded prohibited firearm, nine months concurrent for possession of methamphetamine for the purpose of trafficking and six months consecutive for possession of a firearm while prohibited on November 14, 2013.
 
 I will acknowledge that several other cases were referred to in submissions, but I do not consider them overly helpful as the circumstances of the offences are noticeably distinguishable and the key principles are set out from the Supreme Court of Canada and British Columbia Court of Appeal authorities referred to above. In this regard, I note that R. v. Cashman, 2022 BCJ 2214, which was a decision referred to by the defence, involved an individual who was not actively involved in addiction at the time of his arrest and had controlled substances in his possession which had the value of between approximately $525,000 and $870,000. I have concluded, as set forth above, that is not the situation with Mr. Dugas. Mr. Dugas, as I have indicated, was a person experiencing homelessness. It appears the only items of value that he had were the drugs that were seized. Position of the parties 
 
 In this case, the position of the parties on sentencing is as follows: a)
 the Crown seeks consecutive sentences for both offences, resulting in a global sentence of seven years in custody less time served; b)
 the defence seeks a global sentence of four years and makes specific note that this would allow him to remain in the provincial system and allow for probation. Conclusions on sentencing
 

Before turning to my ultimate conclusion on sentencing, I do want to make brief reference to a very recent decision which was delivered subsequent to my actually having initially prepared these decisions, and submissions were not made by counsel on this. The case is the R. v. Kehoe, 2023 BCCA 2, decision which addresses in considerable detail with the importance of how the Gladue principles are to be fully considered and applied when sentencing offenders of Indigenous heritage. This decision, which is written by Justice Marchand of our Court of Appeal, succinctly described the Gladue principles at paragraphs 35 to 44. I am only going to refer to paragraphs 46 and 47, for the record:
 
In many cases involving the sentencing of Indigenous offenders, Canada's assimilationist policies have been so successful that the offender may be largely or completely disconnected from their Indigenous culture, community and support . . . In such cases, an obvious tension arises in the task of balancing (1) the well-known principle that it is not necessary to establish a direct causal link between systemic and background factors and the offence at issue with (2) the requirement that it is nevertheless necessary to "evaluate relevant information about the significance of a person's Indigenous identity and the individual's circumstances as an Indigenous person" . . . 
 
As with all of the challenges in the sentencing process, we rely on the wisdom and experience of the sentencing judge to strike the right balance. In R. v. Whitehead, 2016 SKCA 165, the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal helpfully observed:
 
The link between systemic or background factors and moral culpability for an offence does not require a detailed chain of causative reasoning. Instead, the analysis is based on inferences drawn from the evidence based on the wisdom and experience of the sentencing judge . . . 
 
In applying this approach, sentencing courts must pay careful attention to the complex harm that colonization and discrimination have inflicted on Aboriginal peoples.
 
 As indicated above, I have the benefit of a Gladue report in this case. I have taken the Gladue factors, including the recent decision in Kehoe which assists the court in applying them, into consideration. Those factors include, but are not limited to, dislocation, violence, substance use, abuse, or misuse, and incarceration. All of these factors are present here. I have specifically considered these factors, notwithstanding that Mr. Dugas has not had the opportunity to date to connect in a meaningful way with his Aboriginal heritage.
 
 Much like Kehoe, although not expressly addressed in the Gladue report, I believe that Mr. Dugas's limited connection to his heritage is related, at least in part, to the fact that neither his grandfather nor his father made those connections, and so while Mr. Dugas's exposure to his heritage was limited, the Gladue factors remain very relevant. However, the impact of his Aboriginal heritage on his blameworthiness, as indicated in the case law referred to, only goes so far. 
 
 Mr. Dugas has pleaded guilty to two serious offences, both of which create significant risk to the public, including contributing to the fentanyl scourge referred to above and the patently obvious risk of carrying a loaded prohibited weapon, particularly in a state of agitation as was described. 
 
 Having regard to all of the circumstances and the submissions of counsel, I am not satisfied that the sentence sought by the defence is proportionate and sustainable, based upon the provisions of the Criminal Code and the case law, which I have taken pains to make efforts to detail and refer to above. Similarly, I find that the sentence sought by the Crown does not fully account for the fact that I have found that Mr. Dugas falls on the spectrum between street‑level and mid‑level trafficking, or fulsomely apply the Gladue factors. However, ultimately, after consideration, the submission of the Crown falls closer in line with the case law for the sentencing of offenders in somewhat similar circumstances.
 
 Thus, I have concluded that a total fit sentence is six years' imprisonment: four years for possession of fentanyl for the purposes of trafficking, and three years for possession of a loaded prohibited weapon, to be served consecutively, which shall be reduced to six years as a global sentence on the basis of the principle of proportionality.
 
 In terms of time served, the calculations are somewhat difficult as Mr. Dugas was in and out of judicial interim release at times. However, at the date of the sentencing hearing, I understood, and I do stand to be corrected, that it was conceded that Mr. Dugas had been in pretrial custody for some 21 months, specifically December 4, 2019 to April 21, 2020, May 6 to May 15, 2020, one day in October 2021, February 16 to March 12, 2021, and August 16, 202 to the day of sentencing. Allowing for a credit of 1.5 days, he was thus, again I understood to generally agreed to, credit of 31.5 months. 
 
 Having regard to my having been presiding outside of the Okanagan, Christmas holidays, and other scheduling challenges, I was not able to give reasons until today, January 6, 2023. I have thus preliminarily concluded that it is appropriate to increase Mr. Dugas's credit to 33 months. 
 
 I will allow, after I finish my reasons, for counsel to make submissions on this point if they think I am demonstrably wrong, but I did do my best to do the math in accordance with the facts before me and the relevant jurisprudence on this issue.
 
 The that I will address counsel with respect to is that I understand there is the DNA order that was being sought by the Crown, which is appropriate in the circumstances. I would simply ask the Crown to confirm which section of the Criminal Code, namely whether it be 487.051(1) or 487.015(3), that the order is being sought on, as that was not clear for me in the materials submitted at the time of the sentencing hearing. 
 
 But I will first ask if counsel has any submissions with respect to my, albeit somewhat arbitrary, increasing of the credit for time served? 
 
 CNSL M. REINHART: No submissions from Crown on that point. What has been stated accords with my recollection of what we put forward at sentencing.
 
 CNSL G. VERDURMEN: No submissions on the part of the defence on that.
 
 THE COURT: Thank you, counsel. And Crown, with respect to ‑- are we in agreement that it is a 487.051(1) DNA order?
 
 CNSL M. REINHART: I am just looking at my Criminal Code right now, because I don't have that at the top of my mind, 487.0 ‑- 
 
 THE COURT:Five‑one, so it is whether it is primary or secondary.
 
 CNSL M. REINHART: Yes, so it's a secondary.
 
 THE COURT: It is, okay. 
 
 CNSL M. REINHART: Thank you.
 
 THE COURT: So Mr. Dugas, I am going to ask you to stand, please. Mr. Dugas, having regard to the reasons for judgement that I have delivered today and that you have heard, you are sentenced to six years of incarceration on account of your guilty pleas set forth on the indictment before the Court of possession of fentanyl for the purpose of trafficking, contrary to s. 5(2) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, and possession of a loaded prohibited or restricted firearm, contrary to s. 95(1) of the Criminal Code. 
 
 There shall be a weapons prohibition made pursuant to s. 109(2)(a), namely a 10‑year prohibition which begins today, the date of sentencing. 
 
 There shall be a mandatory order of forfeiture and destruction of the weapon involved in the offence pursuant to s. 491(1) of the Criminal Code.
 
 And I am satisfied, pursuant to s. 487.051(3) of the Criminal Code, that it is in the best interests of the administration of justice to make an order in Form 5.04 authorizing the taking of samples of bodily substances from you for the purpose of registration in the DNA National Data Bank. These samples will be taken from you while you are in custody, and you must submit to the taking of these samples.
 
 You may be seated now, Mr. Dugas.
 
 THE CLERK: May I confirm which counts the DNA order and the firearms order apply to?
 
 THE COURT: I am sorry, Madam Clerk, that was somewhat garbled, I could not quite hear you.
 
 THE CLERK: Oh, I am sorry. The DNA order and the firearms order, I just wish to confirm which counts they apply to.
 
 THE COURT: They apply to the s. 95(1) possession of the restricted or prohibited weapon.
 
 THE CLERK: Thank you.
 
 THE COURT: Subject to any matters that counsel believe I have inadvertently omitted, those are my reasons for judgment.
 
 CNSL G. VERDURMEN: Yes, thank you, Madam Justice. Just to make it real for my client, the indication then would be that he still has 39 months to serve. Would that be ‑- 
 
 THE COURT: Yes. 
 
 CNSL G. VERDURMEN: Thirty‑nine months left to serve, sir, and there is no probation order.
 
 THE COURT: No. 
 
 CNSL G. VERDURMEN: Thank you. Those were ‑- and in terms of when you sentenced him, it's ‑- will the term of six years be indicated against each count? That's what ‑- 
THE COURT: No, sorry, what I did was I actually sentenced to Mr. Dugas for seven years and then reduced for proportionality. So let me go back to the exact ‑- 
CNSL G. VERDURMEN: Just when ‑- when he stood up, on each count you said ‑- I think you said your sentence is six years, so I just wanted to make sure.
THE COURT: Yes. No, so what my conclusion was that ‑- I just want to make sure to read it back for the record, the primary sentence is four years for the possession of fentanyl for the purposes of trafficking, and three years for the possession of a loaded prohibited weapon, to be served consecutively, but I reduced them to six years as a global sentence on the basis of the principle of proportionality.
CNSL G. VERDURMEN: Thank you. I just wanted to make sure that was on the record.
THE COURT: Yes, thank you, and as I just had to go back to a page in my reasons. All right, thank you very much, counsel, for your helpful submissions.
CNSL M. REINHART: Thank you, Madam Justice. I thank my friend.
CNSL G. VERDURMEN: Thank you, Madam Justice, and my friend, thank you.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/sc/2023bcsc96.html
 


The offender Raymond Howard Gaglardi is a 78-year-old man, before the court for sentencing in relation to a series of sexual offences, committed over a span of more than 40 years commencing in 1971. There were 11 victims, all males, who were between 10 and 30 years old when Mr. Gaglardi committed the offences against them. All of the victims were much younger than Mr. Gaglardi. In each instance, Mr. Gaglardi took advantage of a position of trust, exploited the vulnerability of the victim, and touched the victim in a sexual manner. Many of the victims suffered substantial and prolonged impacts as a result of Mr. Gaglardi’s offending behaviour. Overview of the Offences
 


Following a three week judge alone trial, I found Mr. Gaglardi guilty on 13 counts. I subsequently entered conditional stays under the rule against multiple convictions for offences arising from the same act or delict in respect of two of the counts. In the result, Mr. Gaglardi is before the court for sentencing on 11 counts, each involving a separate victim. 
 


The offences can be broken down into two separate groups. 
 


The first group of offences took place between 1971 and 1981, during which time Mr. Gaglardi was associated with the Glad Tidings Temple in Vancouver. Each of the five victims knew and interacted with Mr. Gaglardi through his association with Glad Tidings, or its affiliated school called Temple Academy, or the church’s summer youth camp. Among other things, Mr. Gaglardi was an “ordained counsellor” at the church, the director of the church’s sound and productions department, a teacher and counsellor at Temple Academy, and an organizer or supervisor at the church’s summer camp. The victims were all males, between 10 and 17 at the time of the incidents, and Mr. Gaglardi was between 25 and 35 years old. In each case Mr. Gaglardi touched the victim in a sexual manner, in circumstances where the victim did not consent, consented on false pretences, or consented based on Mr. Gaglardi’s exploitation of an authority or trust relationship.
 


The second group of offences took place between 1993 and 2015, during which time Mr. Gaglardi was associated with the Hillside Community Church in Coquitlam. All but one of the six victims came to know Mr. Gaglardi through his association with Hillside. Many of the victims were also clients of Mr. Gaglardi’s counselling, mentorship, and holistic natural health practice. The victims were all males, between 15 and 30 years old at the time of the offences, and Mr. Gaglardi was much older. In each case, Mr. Gaglardi touched the victim in a sexual manner, in circumstances where the victim did not consent, consented on false pretenses, or consented based on Mr. Gaglardi’s exploitation of a trust relationship. Particulars of the Offences, and Victim Impacts Vancouver Counts Count 3
 


On count 3, I found Mr. Gaglardi guilty of indecent assault against RF, contrary to former s. 156 of the Criminal Code. This count comprises three incidents between 1 October 1971 and 30 December 1974, during which time RF was 14 to 15 years old. In the first two incidents, Mr. Gaglardi used his hands to touch RF’s genitals, while RF’s pants and underwear were down, ostensibly to check for venereal disease. These incidents occurred in Mr. Gaglardi’s office at the Glad Tidings church in Vancouver. In the third incident, Mr. Gaglardi once again touched RF’s genitals, while RF’s shorts and underwear were down, ostensibly to check for injuries after RF had cut his knee during a baseball game, at the Glad Tidings summer camp near Sechelt. 
 


In his trial testimony, RF explained that when he told his parents what had happened to him, his mother believed him but his father did not. This caused a rift in the family. RF’s father basically disowned him, I infer out of loyalty to Glad Tidings. Shortly after turning 16, RF moved out of the family home and went to northern British Columbia for work. He agreed with the suggestion that what happened to him at Glad Tidings was the cause of his leaving home at such a young age. He testified that it “pretty much set [his] whole life on a different path”. 
 


In his victim impact statement, RF added that after some 50 years of supressing what happened, shoving it to the back of his mind, he now realizes the effect that Mr. Gaglardi’s abuse has had on him. He repeated how his father disowned him for causing disgrace to the family. Others in the church turned their back on him. Mr. Gaglardi’s abuse caused RF to suffer feelings of self loathing and inadequacy. RF believes that his personal relationships have suffered as a result. RF concluded his victim impact statement by stating that his life was sent down a path of concealment, denial and hate by Mr. Gaglardi’s actions. He has carried the emotional scars for some 50 years, always wondering why no one listened or took his complaints seriously. Count 5
 


On count 5, I found Mr. Gaglardi guilty of indecent assault against GP, contrary to former s. 156 of the Criminal Code, in relation to an incident that occurred some time between 14 July 1975 and 14 July 1977. GP was 10 or 11 years old at the time. Mr. Gaglardi slipped his hand into GP’s swimming trunks and touched his penis, at a swimming pool in Mr. Gaglardi’s condo building in Burnaby, on an occasion when GP was sleeping over at Mr. Gaglardi’s residence.
 

In his trial testimony, GP recounted that he had a difficult family situation with a history of violence leading up to the divorce of his parents. After the divorce, GP had no contact with his father. GP’s family attended Glad Tidings, and Mr. Gaglardi took on a role as a sort of “father figure” to GP. GP believed that Mr. Gaglardi was a psychologist or doctor of psychology.
 

When contacted by Ms. Sidhu, the author of the pre-sentence report, in anticipation of sentencing, GP had nothing further to say. I will add, from the Court’s perspective, that based upon his circumstances at the time of the offence, GP was a vulnerable boy and Mr. Gaglardi clearly took advantage of that vulnerability and abused his position of trust. Count 6
 

On count 6, Mr. Gaglardi stands convicted of indecent assault against RM, contrary to former s. 156 of the Criminal Code. This offence relates to an incident that took place some time between 1 January 1977 and 31 December 1977, when RM was 12 years old. Mr. Gaglardi conducted a nude examination of RM’s entire body, using a pen as a purported sensor or electrical feedback device, ostensibly as a means of assessing RM’s muscular development. In the course of doing so, Mr. Gaglardi touched RM’s genitals with the pen. This incident took place in Mr. Gaglardi’s office at the Glad Tidings church.
 

Referring back to RM’s evidence at trial, he testified that he had “behavioural problems” and he was always getting in trouble in school. From time to time when he acted up, he was sent to see Mr. Gaglardi, apparently for some kind of guidance counselling or discipline. RM recalled that Mr. Gaglardi was always pleasant with him and never used violence or physical discipline, unlike some of the others involved in running the school. The offence occurred in a context when RM went to see Mr. Gaglardi for advice about his muscular development. RM wanted to ask Mr. Gaglardi about weightlifting. RM testified that he found the touching incident embarrassing and shameful. He was a shy, skinny kid who did not even like swimming without a t-shirt. Even as a 12-year-old, RM thought what Mr. Gaglardi said about the pen as a feedback device was “bs” but he went along with it. He trusted Mr. Gaglardi, because he was associated with the church, and because he had an education as some kind of a doctor. RM said that Mr. Gaglardi’s conduct was inappropriate and “he needs to face up to it”.
 

The author of the pre-sentence report was unable to reach RM for further comment in advance of sentencing. 
Count 8
 

On count 8, Mr. Gaglardi stands convicted of indecent assault against DP, contrary to former s. 156 of the Criminal Code. This offence relates to an incident that took place some time between 1 January 1977 and 31 December 1978. DP was 17 years old at the time. Mr. Gaglardi masturbated DP, ostensibly as part of a human sexuality experiment or study, in the bedroom of Mr. Gaglardi’s residence in Burnaby. 
 

In his trial testimony, DP explained that prior to the incident he trusted Mr. Gaglardi and felt that he was a professional because he had a PhD. He believed Mr. Gaglardi had a genuine interest in human sexuality. When he agreed to participate in what Mr. Gaglardi told him was supposed to be a research project he had no idea that Mr. Gaglardi would do what he ended up doing. After the incident he was extremely embarrassed and just wanted to forget it. 
 

DP told Ms. Sidhu, the author of the pre-sentence report, that Mr. Gaglardi’s conduct made him feel dirty. At the time of the offence he had no sexual experience and Mr. Gaglardi introduced him to pornography. DP says that Mr. Gaglardi’s conduct has had a profound negative impact on many aspects of his life, including difficulty in forming and maintaining relationships. DP has struggled with his faith and has avoided interacting with people associated with the church. Mr. Gaglardi’s conduct caused him to be mistrustful of other people. DP continues to struggle with the emotional scars of what Mr. Gaglardi did to him. He regards Mr. Gaglardi as a sexual predator. He feels that Mr. Gaglardi took advantage of vulnerable teenagers, causing rifts in their families and their faith. Count 10 
 

On count 10, I found Mr. Gaglardi guilty of indecent assault against KH, contrary to former s. 156 of the Criminal Code. This offence pertains to two incidents that occurred some time between 1 January 1979 and 1 July 1981, when KH was between 13 and 15 years old. In the first incident, Mr. Gaglardi touched KH’s penis while KH was naked in a bathtub at Mr. Gaglardi’s residence, ostensibly to show KH how to clean it. In the second incident, Mr. Gaglardi used some kind of electrical device to touch or stimulate KH’s penis, ostensibly to measure electrical flow as a means of assessing KH’s counselling needs, in a bedroom at Mr. Gaglardi’s residence. 
 

In his victim impact statement, KH states that at the time of this offence, his parents had divorced, and he lacked self-esteem and confidence. He felt that he was “easy prey” for Mr. Gaglardi. KH explains “Pretending to care about my emotional, physical and spiritual well being, only to betray that trust, set in motion a life filled with mistrust, anger, and most of all a fear of rejection”. KH goes on to explain the impacts on his life. He has had trouble in his personal relationships due to a general reluctance to place his trust in others, including his close relatives. KH emphasizes that despite this, he does not allow what Mr. Gaglardi did to him to define him or the person he has become. KH says it is his choice to forgive Mr. Gaglardi, but this does not mean KH approves of what happened to him or that there should be no consequences for it. 
Coquitlam Counts Count 12
 

On count 12, Mr. Gaglardi stands convicted of sexual assault of ML contrary to former s. 271(1) of the Criminal Code. This offence comprises three separate instances between 3 January 1993 and 2 January 1996, all of which occurred at some point after ML’s 18th birthday. Mr. Gaglardi was around 50 years old. In one instance, Mr. Gaglardi used some kind of stimulation device to cause ML to ejaculate, ostensibly to collect a semen sample for some kind of testing. In the other two instances, Mr. Gaglardi performed internal prostate stimulation on ML, ostensibly as a means of releasing emotion or anxiety. All three events occurred in the counselling area in the basement of Mr. Gaglardi’s house in Coquitlam. 
 

In his evidence at trial, ML testified that he went to see Mr. Gaglardi for some form of counselling to deal with a severe marihuana dependency, when he was 18 years old, after an incident in which he got into an altercation with a roommate and was evicted from his apartment. He felt that his life had become unmanageable, and sought help from Mr. Gaglardi in dealing with his drug dependency. ML testified that he trusted Mr. Gaglardi because of his position in the church, his relationship with ML’s parents, and presentation as a kind, caring, loving person, interested in helping ML with his issues. Mr. Gaglardi led him to believe that the procedures he performed were for his health. But for that, he would never have consented or allowed Mr. Gaglardi to do what he did.
 

In speaking with Ms. Sidhu in preparation of the pre-sentence report, ML alluded to the impact that Mr. Gaglardi’s criminal conduct has had on his life and the lives of other victims. ML’s personal perspective is that he does not want to waste any more time thinking about Mr. Gaglardi or giving him space in his mind. 
Count 13
 

On count 13, Mr. Gaglardi stands convicted of sexual exploitation of GA contrary to s. 153 of the Criminal Code. This offence involved two separate incidents between 1 September 1995 and 30 June 1998, when GA was between 15 and 17 years old. Mr. Gaglardi was in his 50s. In one instance, Mr. Gaglardi touched GA’s penis with his hand, during a massage that was undertaken as part of an alleged research project that GA had been convinced to participate in by Mr. Gaglardi. In the other instance, Mr. Gaglardi performed a “coffee enema” on GA, ostensibly as a form of “detoxification procedure”. Both incidents occurred in the counselling area in the basement of Mr. Gaglardi’s house in Coquitlam.
 

In his trial testimony, GA testified that he knew Mr. Gaglardi as a youth pastor at the Hillside Community Church. In his mid-teens, GA went to see Mr. Gaglardi to enquire about doing work or odd jobs to earn spending money. Originally, Mr. Gaglardi hired GA to do yard work and other things around his house. Later, Mr. Gaglardi recruited GA to participate in an alleged research project for which he would be paid, in the course of which, over time, GA allowed Mr. Gaglardi to examine his entire body, including his private areas, while GA was naked under a sheet. It was in that context that Mr. Gaglardi ultimately committed the touching offence. GA also described other instances or other conduct in which Mr. Gaglardi tried to overtly sexualize their relationship, by discussing such things as masturbation. GA also recounted an incident, years later, when he went to see Mr. Gaglardi for fitness advice, at which time GA attempted to raise the issue of the sexual touching, as it was something GA continued to harbour resentment about, but Mr. Gaglardi denied that anything inappropriate happened for which anyone needed to make amends.
 

The pre-sentence report indicates that GA provided comments about the impact of the offence to a victim support worker, but I have not been given any details. From the Court’s perspective, I will simply say that at the time of the offences, GA was a vulnerable person, an adolescent boy, who wanted to earn some spending money. Mr. Gaglardi took advantage of the situation and indeed paid GA to participate in an alleged study on body scent, furnishing Mr. Gaglardi with opportunities to engage in bizarre, sexually intrusive behaviour with the victim. Mr. Gaglardi’s conduct clearly impacted GA, as reflected in the fact that years later, he tried to raise it with Mr. Gaglardi in an effort to make things right as part of GA’s own effort to deal with addiction issues. Count 15
 

On count 15, I found Mr. Gaglardi guilty of sexual exploitation of JU contrary to s. 153 of the Criminal Code. This offence occurred some time between 6 January 2001 and 5 January 2003, when JU was 16 years old. Mr. Gaglardi was in his late 50s. Mr. Gaglardi touched or handled JU’s erect penis, during what was referred to as a body mapping exercise in the gym area in the basement of Mr. Gaglardi’s house in Coquitlam.
 

The Crown did not tender a victim impact statement from JU.
 

In his evidence at trial, JU recounted how he first came to know Mr. Gaglardi at the age of about 12 or 13, while attending the Hillside Community Church. JU believed Mr. Gaglardi was a church elder and a youth pastor. JU explained that he had emotional issues when he was a teenager. There was “trauma” in his family. He tried to spend as little time as possible at home. He considered himself a vulnerable person, lacking a supportive father figure. It was in this context that JU developed a relationship with Mr. Gaglardi. JU placed his trust in Mr. Gaglardi because of Mr. Gaglardi’s relationship with the church and his older brother.
 

JU spent time with Mr. Gaglardi in formal counselling, and also socializing with him. JU enjoyed the counselling sessions at the time, because he appreciated Mr. Gaglardi’s interest and concern, and the closeness of their relationship. JU recounted an incident in which he was contemplating suicide and sought out Mr. Gaglardi for support.
 

After the penis touching incident, JU started distancing himself from Mr. Gaglardi. He cannot remember if he stopped the counselling right away, but there were no more physical interactions. JU continued to see Mr. Gaglardi at church on Sundays, but he stopped interacting with him. He tried to maintain an outward “air of normality”. At the same time, JU felt “heartbroken”, because he thought he had found someone who cared about him and was interested in him. Count 20
 

On count 20, Mr. Gaglardi stands convicted of sexual assault of AH contrary to former s. 271(1) of the Criminal Code. This offence occurred some time between 14 September 2004 and 31 December 2007. AH was between 27 and 29 years old. Mr. Gaglardi was around 60. On at least two occasions, Mr. Gaglardi performed external prostate massage on AH, using some kind of prosthetic device, ostensibly as a form of emotional release or anxiety release technique. Once again these incidents took place in the counselling area in the basement of Mr. Gaglardi’s house in Coquitlam. 
 

At trial, AH testified that he went to see Mr. Gaglardi for counselling because he was an awkward and shy person, with a speech impediment, who found it difficult to meet women and wanted to improve his confidence. He placed his trust in Mr. Gaglardi, but over time felt that Mr. Gaglardi pressured him to submit to increasingly invasive techniques. 
 

In his victim impact statement, which AH read aloud in court, he explained that when he went to see Mr. Gaglardi he felt a lack of ability to form relationships with women. He thought Mr. Gaglardi was a professional and a man of faith. He says he was a naïve young man who was taken advantage of by Mr. Gaglardi. AH also explained in his victim impact statement that it has taken him a long time to process what Mr. Gaglardi did to him and how it has affected him. AH explained how Mr. Gaglardi’s conduct caused him to be mistrustful of professionals and people in authority positions. He places less trust in people because he is suspicious of ulterior motives. He feels angry that he paid Mr. Gaglardi money and trusted him, and is saddened by Mr. Gaglardi’s betrayal of that trust. Count 23 
 

On count 23, I found Mr. Gaglardi guilty of sexual assault of CP contrary to s. 271 of the Criminal Code. This offence involved two separate events that occurred some time between 1 January 2014 and 1 October 2014. CP was 26 years old at the time. Mr. Gaglardi around 70 years old. In one instance, Mr. Gaglardi used a towel to touch CP’s erect penis, during some kind of massage treatment session. In another instance, Mr. Gaglardi inserted a q-tip into CP’s anus, ostensibly as a means of taking a fecal swab or fecal sample for a so-called “microbiome analysis”. Both incidents took place in the counselling area in the basement of Mr. Gaglardi’s house in Coquitlam. 
 

At trial, CP’s evidence was that he sought out Mr. Gaglardi for counselling services on the recommendation of a friend. CP was interested in counselling but did not have much money and was concerned about the cost. Mr. Gaglardi told CP that he prayed about it and concluded that he should counsel CP free of charge. CP considered it a great opportunity. He believed Mr. Gaglardi was a qualified professional with doctorates in theology, natural medicine, and psychology. The vast majority of the counselling Mr. Gaglardi provided to CP was via Skype. Mr. Gaglardi’s sexual offending took place on two of the very few occasions when they met in person.
 

CP told the probation officer who prepared the pre-sentence report that he felt relief when Mr. Gaglardi was found guilty, realizing that he was not alone. At the same time CP felt disheartened to learn about how many others were abused by Mr. Gaglardi. CP was hopeful that during the sentencing process Mr. Gaglardi would acknowledge the pain and harm he has caused to CP and the other victims. From his own perspective, CP has been working toward forgiving Mr. Gaglardi for what he did. 
Count 25
 

On count 25, I found Mr. Gaglardi guilty of sexual assault of JK contrary to s. 271 of the Criminal Code. This offence occurred some time between 1 December 2007 and 31 December 2007. There was no specific evidence as to JK’s age, but I found that he was a young adult at the time of the offence. Mr. Gaglardi was in his early 60s. Mr. Gaglardi touched JK’s scrotum with the back of his bare hand, while JK was nude, during a massage session. The offence took place in the counselling area in the basement of Mr. Gaglardi’s house in Coquitlam.
 

In his trial testimony, JK explained that he first met Mr. Gaglardi at the Hillside Community Church. JK was not a congregant, but met Mr. Gaglardi in the course of doing work on the church’s computer system. When Mr. Gaglardi told him about his education and counselling practice, JK expressed interest in counselling to deal with past trauma. JK was concerned about the cost, and Mr. Gaglardi said he could counsel JK for free as part of some kind of study. JK’s sessions with Mr. Gaglardi began as counselling but quickly progressed to forms of touch therapy with the level of contact becoming more and more intrusive and uncomfortable for JK. Mr. Gaglardi also made efforts to introduce conversation about sexual topics into the therapy. After the incident in which the offence occurred, the counselling relationship devolved as JK and Mr. Gaglardi did not see eye to eye on Mr. Gaglardi’s methods. Eventually, JK decided to stop going entirely.
 

In his comments to the author of the pre-sentence report, JK reported that he feels severely impacted by Mr. Gaglardi’s mistreatment of him. As a result of the incident, JK has required and continues to attend psychological counselling. He feels as though Mr. Gaglardi took advantage of his vulnerability and manipulated him. 
Background and Current Circumstances of the Offender
 

At trial, Mr. Gaglardi testified at length about his background, education, role in the church, his work history, and his counselling practice. Without repeating all of that here, I will simply describe what is most relevant for sentencing purposes. I also now have the benefit of the information in the pre-sentence report and the Psychological Assessment, and the submissions of defence counsel as to Mr. Gaglardi’s personal circumstances. 
 

As noted, Mr. Gaglardi is 78 years old. He was born in 1944, in Vancouver. At some point his family moved to Silverdale, B.C., which is where he grew up. Mr. Gaglardi is the youngest of three siblings. Mr. Gaglardi told Ms. Sidhu, the author of the pre-sentence report, that he had a “normal upbringing” with no abuse or neglect. His older brother confirmed that they had supportive parents.
 

Mr. Gaglardi has been married to his wife for 49 years. They do not have any children. Mr. Gaglardi’s wife continues to support him and attended most if not all of the trial and also attended the sentencing hearing. Ms. Gaglardi takes the view that her husband has always been interested in helping people. She supports Mr. Gaglardi’s continued denial of responsibility and therefore has no insight into Mr. Gaglardi’s offending behaviour, although that is not something that can be used against Mr. Gaglardi or treated as an aggravating factor. It is simply something I must take into account in considering Ms. Gaglardi’s description of her husband and her perceptions of his character. She has an obvious blind spot with regard to Mr. Gaglardi’s conduct toward the 11 male victims, and what that says about Mr. Gaglardi’s character.
 

Mr. Gaglardi’s educational background was addressed at length in the reasons for judgment. The bottom line is that the vast majority if not the entirety of Mr. Gaglardi’s post-secondary education was via correspondence or distance learning, from an institution called Ohio Christian College. Mr. Gaglardi obtained a PhD, which he described in his trial testimony as a doctorate in philosophy with a specialization in counselling. He obtained this degree in the late 1960s. Several years later, the U.S. Federal Trade Commission issued a ruling declaring that Ohio Christian College was basically a sham organization with no proper academic content or faculty and no authority to issue valid degrees. At trial, Mr. Gaglardi claimed to have only learned about all of this some time in 2020, when he decided to look into his own educational background after the charges were laid. I did not find this to be a credible account of Mr. Gaglardi’s insight into the dubious nature of his academic qualifications.
 

Throughout his adult life, at least until very recently, Mr. Gaglardi has referred to himself as a doctor. He has used that honorific in various contexts, including in his work at Glad Tidings church, in the promotion of his counselling practice, and on a website called “Dr. Ray.ca”. To be fair, he has never held himself out to be a medical doctor. Rather, he has taken the position that he is has a PhD with a specialization in counselling.
 

Without going into all the details spelled out in the reasons for judgment, I will say that for a fair part of his adult life Mr. Gaglardi has been involved in various churches and church-related organizations. From the late 1960s until the early 1980s, he had a formal employment relationship with the Glad Tidings church, where he worked as an “ordained counsellor”, technical director of sound and productions, and educator or school guidance counsellor. In the latter years, Mr. Gaglardi has attended and been involved in various capacities at the Hillside Community Church in Coquitlam. His role there was certainly less formal, but he still had a significant presence in the church. 
 

From some time in the 1990s up until around 2020, Mr. Gaglardi carried on a counselling practice, from an office or counselling space in the basement of his house in Coquitlam. This includes the period of time covered by the Coquitlam counts. The evidence at trial reflected that Mr. Gaglardi had literally thousands of clients in his counselling practice. A fair proportion were female or married couples. Further, a great number of his clients only saw him for talk therapy and there was no physical element whatsoever to the counselling. This is relevant because it shows that Mr. Gaglardi’s entire counselling practice was not set up as a fraud or a sham solely for the purposes of facilitating sexual misconduct. I accept that Mr. Gaglardi was interested in counselling people and in helping them with their problems. However, when it comes to his physical techniques, they were not only unconventional, but Mr. Gaglardi had no professional or formal qualification to engage in them. Further, Mr. Gaglardi was opportunistic in using his status, his counselling practice, and the opportunities afforded him to have close personal contact with his clients, to prey upon and abuse the six victims in the Coquitlam counts, all of whom were vulnerable teenagers or young men.
 

Mr. Gaglardi has indicated, and I accept, that after he was charged in this matter, he closed his counselling practice and he has no intention of ever returning to it. He has also shut down his website. At the age of 78, and with the consequences of the sentence that are going to be visited upon him, I find there is literally no prospect of Mr. Gaglardi offering counselling to any members of the public in the future.
 

Mr. Gaglardi has no criminal record. At sentencing his counsel filed a total of 14 reference letters, or letters of support. The people who penned these letters, at least within their scope of knowledge, consider Mr. Gaglardi to be a good person who has made positive contributions to the community. However, the case law recognizes that in view of the secretive nature of sexual offending of the sort engaged in by Mr. Gaglardi, character references of this sort are of limited value. See R. v. Kissner, 2019 ONSC 4872, aff’d 2020 ONCA 684, where the trial judge explained at para. 36 that the public persona of the offender can be much different than the persona exhibited to the victims. The judge went on to quote from R. v. Profit, 1993 CanLII 78 (SCC), 3 S.C.R. 637 that in this context, the “propensity value of character evidence as to morality is diminished”. See also R. v. Baltazar, 2021 ABQB 879 at para. 45. In this case, the letters show that Mr. Gaglardi has some positive traits and has interacted with a fair number of people who continue to support and respect him. But the crimes committed by Mr. Gaglardi were perpetrated in private, in a context where his reputation and good standing in various churches was actually one of the factors that led the victims to place trust in him. 
 

Mr. Gaglardi is in relatively good health for his age. There are some concerns about the state of his heart. At the time of the sentencing hearing, Mr. Gaglardi was waiting on an appointment to see a cardiologist. He has also had some issues with his prostate and is being monitored for cancer. In the pre-sentence report, Mr. Gaglardi said he had no mental health concerns, although he struggles with memory issues. Others, including his wife and his brother, are concerned that Mr. Gaglardi is hiding the extent to which the criminal proceedings are affecting his emotional or mental state.
 

With regard to his attitude toward the offences, Mr. Gaglardi continues to maintain that he did nothing wrong. He says he has only ever had intimate relationships with age-appropriate women, and denies any sexual interest in males or in children. Mr. Gaglardi’s refusal to accept responsibility for the offences is not an aggravating factor on sentencing. It simply reflects an absence of remorse, which is an absence of a mitigating factor. This is unfortunate because it deprives the victims of any sense that Mr. Gaglardi acknowledges the harm that he has caused.
 

Mr. Gaglardi’s attitude toward the offences and the offending behaviour is also a relevant factor when it comes to risk assessment. Because he lacks insight or will not come to grips with his offending behaviour, he is not able to appropriately deal with it by way of counselling and treatment. Mr. Gaglardi does indicate that he is willing to participate in any program that he is required to attend, but that process will obviously not be as beneficial in addressing risk of re offence as it would if Mr. Gaglardi acknowledged his conduct so that he could implement strategies to mitigate risk. Psychological Assessment
 

Mr. Gaglardi participated in the preparation of a psychological assessment intended to assess his risk of re-offence. He was assessed on two separate scales, one that is static or actuarial, and the other that is dynamic or subjective. On the static analysis, Mr. Gaglardi’s risk of re-offence fell into the very low range. On the dynamic analysis, his risk was assessed as moderate. His denial of wrongdoing meant that the dynamic assessment was based on less than complete information.
 

Risk assessment is an important factor in sentencing for sexual offences, because the offender’s criminal conduct can be driven by persistent sexual deviance, and because of the gravity of the harm associated with re-offence.
 

In Mr. Gaglardi’s case, despite his unwillingness to acknowledge the crimes and his consequent lack of insight, I would conclude that Mr. Gaglardi’s overall risk of re-offence is low. I say that for three reasons. First, Mr. Gaglardi is presently 78 years old and will be older still when his sentence is completed. At such an advanced age his means and opportunity would be significantly diminished. Second, Mr. Gaglardi has indicated both in his testimony and in the pre-sentence report that he has shut down his counselling practice and I find that there is literally no chance of it ever starting up again. This will further limit Mr. Gaglardi’s means and opportunity. Third, apart from the offences for which he is now being sentenced, Mr. Gaglardi has no prior criminal record and has lived a pro-social lifestyle. Even though he does not admit guilt, I can accept that he would abide by any terms or conditions of parole and is therefore unlikely to place himself in situations where he could re-offend, at least up to the point of warrant expiry. The risk can never be completely eliminated but in this case it is low. Sentencing Parameters for the Offences
 

In respect of all five Vancouver counts (counts 3, 5, 6, 8, and 10), the offence in question was indecent assault of a male contrary to former s. 156 of the Criminal Code. At the time the offences were committed, the maximum penalty was ten years in jail for each count.
 

In respect of counts 13 and 15, the offence was sexual exploitation by a person in a position of trust or authority toward a young person. At the time the offences were committed, the maximum penalty under the statute was five years in jail for each count.
 

With respect to counts 12 and 20, and 25, the offence was sexual assault under former s. 271(1) of the Criminal Code. At the time of the offences, the maximum penalty was ten years in jail on each count.
 

With respect to count 23, the offence was sexual assault under s. 271 of the Criminal Code. At the time of the offence, the maximum penalty where the complainant was 16 years or older was ten years in jail. Crown and Defence Positions on Sentence
 

It is common ground between the Crown and the defence that because of the seriousness of the offences and the effect on the victims, a jail sentence is required. It is also common ground that the overall length or duration of the sentence must be more than two years, such that it must be served in a federal penitentiary. 
 

The Crown and the defence are also more or less on the same page as to the appropriate structure of the sentence. To explain, both parties recognize that since the offences in question relate to 11 separate incidents or series of incidents involving 11 separate victims, consecutive sentences are required. This is not a proper case for concurrent sentences. Both parties further recognize that after determining the fit sentence for each count, the Court must then consider whether the overall length or duration of the 11 consecutive sentences added together would in its totality be longer or harsher than is warranted in view of the offender’s overall culpability and personal circumstances.
 

Where the Crown and defence part company is on the length of sentence, both in terms of the individual offences and the net result.
 

The Crown argues for consecutive sentences totalling 17 to 24 years, and goes on to say that under the totality principle the total length of the sentence should be 10 to 12 years in jail. The Crown stresses the seriousness of the offences, in terms of the abuse of trust, vulnerability of the victims, and the substantial victim impacts. The Crown also seeks a mandatory DNA collection order, and an order requiring Mr. Gaglardi to be on the sex offender registry for 20 years.
 

The defence submits that Mr. Gaglardi should receive consecutive sentences totalling 6.5 to 7.5 years, which should then be reduced under the totality principle to arrive at a net sentence of 3 to 4 years. The defence stresses the low risk of re-offence, the fact that Mr. Gaglardi has no criminal record and has family and community support, and Mr. Gaglardi’s advanced age and somewhat poor health. Legal Analysis
 

In addressing sentencing for sexual offences, particularly sexual offences involving youthful and vulnerable victims, I take considerable guidance from the Supreme Court of Canada’s decision in R. v. Friesen, 2020 SCC 9. 
 

In Friesen, the Court was dealing specifically with sentencing for offences of sexual violence against children, that is, victims who were under the age of 18. The Court held that sentences for crimes of sexual violence against children must increase. There were several considerations that led to this conclusion. One was an emerging, deeper understanding of the vulnerability of child victims, and the profound harm that such criminal conduct causes to victims, families, and communities. Another was that, through amendments to the Criminal Code over the past 15 years or so, Parliament has mandated that sentences for sexual offences against children must increase. 
 

The Court went on to offer specific guidance on sentence increases for such offences, stating among other things at para. 114 that “mid-single digit penitentiary terms for sexual offences against children are normal and that upper single-digit and double-digit sentences should be neither unusual nor reserved for rare or exceptional circumstances”. It is with some trepidation that I have plucked out and cited this single line of the case on sentencing ranges. This is no doubt a gross over simplification that does not do justice to the guidance offered by the Court in Friesen. Indeed, the Court was clearly concerned about the rigidity of sentencing ranges generally, and was reluctant to lay down any kind of national starting point or national sentencing range for offences of sexual violence against children. Still, the Court ultimately decided that sentencing ranges for sexual offences against children had to increase, for the reasons I listed above, and the Court also delineated a number of factors to be considered in determining fit sentences for such offences.
 

In the wake of this recent guidance from the Supreme Court of Canada, it is now important for courts to distinguish between pre-Friesen and post-Friesen sentencing decisions. The sentences imposed in cases decided before Friesen may not reflect a proper understanding of the objective gravity and moral blameworthiness of offences of sexual violence against children. At para. 110 of Friesen, the Court cautioned against relying on “dated” sentencing precedents that do not reflect society’s current awareness of the impact of sexual abuse on children.
 

However, there is some need for caution in considering Friesen in cases dealing with what is sometimes referred to as “historical” sexual offences. Depending on how far back the offences reach, one must consider whether some or all of the Criminal Code amendments compelling the Court in Friesen to conclude that Parliament has mandated an increase in the severity of punishment for sexual offences against children were actually in force at the time of the offending behaviour. Section 11(i) of the Charter guarantees that where the punishment has been varied between the date of the offence and the time of sentencing, the offender is entitled to the benefit of the lesser punishment.
 

This point was addressed in R. v. Gerrard, 2021 BCSC 1219, wherein Justice Shergill stated: 
 

In the context of historical sexual offences such as this one, it is important to bear in mind that some of the legislative initiatives that support increasing sentences occurred after the offending period. These include increasing the statutory maximum for these offences, and the provisions contained in s. 718.01 of the Code. However, as the Court stated in Friesen, there exists another compelling reason for an upward departure of sentences – our contemporary social understanding of harmfulness and the wrongfulness of sexual offences against children. Indeed, as our Court of Appeal noted in R. v. Plehanov, 2020 BCCA 249 at para. 19, the Friesen principles have general application even in cases where the offence predates the legislative changes.
 

Justice Gomery also considered the issue in R. v. N.S.N.C., 2020 BCSC 1843, in the following passage:
 

Unfortunately, there is some difficulty applying Friesen in cases of offences committed many years ago. Friesen gives two reasons why an increase is necessary: first, the sentences imposed must reflect the courts’ current, better understanding of the wrongfulness and impact of sexual offences against children; and second, sentences should increase to reflect increases in the maximum sentences available for certain sexual offences. In the case of an offence committed in 1993, the first of these reasons is applicable, but the second is not because, pursuant to s. 11(i) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, Mr. C has the right to have his sentence determined on the basis of the maximum sentence in 1993 (10 years) as opposed to the higher current maximum of 14 years.
 

The Crown quotes a direction from Friesen at para. 114 that “mid-single-digit penitentiary terms for sexual offences against children are normal and that upper-single digit and double-digit penitentiary terms should be neither unusual nor reserved for rare or exceptional circumstances”. 
This direction is based on both parts of the reasoning in Friesen, and only half of that reasoning carries weight in this sentencing. 
Indeed, a double-digit sentence above 10 years would not be legal in this case, because it would exceed the maximum, and a high single-digit sentence could not be justified. 
 

Justice Gomery went on to consider and apply certain portions of Friesen reflecting the Supreme Court of Canada’s recognition of the inherent moral blameworthiness of sexual offences against children in view of the vulnerability of child victims, and the profound harm that sexual violence causes to child victims, their families, and communities more generally.
 

Finally, as Justice Shergill noted in Gerrard, the application of Friesen to sentencing for offences committed before the statutory amendments cited by the Supreme Court of Canada was also considered in Plehanov. There, Justice Grauer stated at para. 19 that while Friesen was decided “in the context of legislative amendments that predate the offence in issue here”, the Supreme Court of Canada’s guidance was “of general application to a wide spectrum of sexual offences against children”. Grauer J.A. went on at para. 20 to quote at length from Friesen, citing passages about the seriousness of the harm and the wrongfulness or moral blameworthiness of sexual offences against children. I find it noteworthy, however, that none of the passages cited by the Court in Plehanov address the Supreme Court of Canada’s more specific guidance on actual sentencing ranges. I consider that to be significant because in my view those portions of the Court’s reasoning in Friesen are tied more or less directly to the statutory amendments in which Parliament had “mandated” that the sentences for sexual offences against children must increase. By virtue of s. 11(i) of the Charter, that statutory mandate cannot be applied retrospectively in the context of sentencing for a criminal offence.
 

The message I take from the case law that I have just reviewed can be stated in two propositions. First, sentencing judges must always take into account what the Supreme Court of Canada said in Friesen about the seriousness, harmfulness, and moral blameworthiness of sexual offences against children. Second, in dealing with offences committed before the Criminal Code amendments mandating increased sentences for such offences, sentencing judges cannot apply the more specific guidance in Friesen regarding sentencing ranges, because that guidance rests at least in part on amendments that were not in force at the time of the offences.
 

With those parameters in mind, dealing specifically with the seriousness and moral blameworthiness of sexual offences against children, the points that I would take from Friesen and apply in the case at bar can be summarized as follows:

(a)  It is essential for sentencing judges to have a proper understanding of the wrongfulness of sexual offences against children, and the harm that such offences causes to victims: Friesen at para. 50. 
(b) The interests that the law is designed to protect include personal autonomy, bodily integrity, sexual integrity, dignity, and equality. In this regard, sentencing courts need to be aware of not merely the physical harm that sexual offences cause to the victim, but also the emotional and psychological harm. Thus, the likely effects of sexual offences include “shame, embarrassment, unresolved anger, reduced ability to trust others”, and fearfulness: Friesen at para. 55-57. 
(c)  These forms of harm are particularly pronounced in children. Even a single instance of sexual violence can profoundly alter a child’s life: Friesen at para. 58.
(d)  Sexual violence against children also causes harm in the form of damaged relationships with families and caregivers. Sexual violence can tear families apart and render them dysfunctional. Parents or siblings my have a misguided sense of blame toward the child victim. And child victims may lose confidence in the ability of family members to protect them: Friesen at para. 60. 
(e) Sexual violence against children can have ripple effects on other relationships. Among other things, child victims of sexual violence may experience a loss of trust amongst people they know or the community at large: Friesen at para. 61.
(f) The protection of children from harm is one of the most fundamental values in our society. Sexual violence against children is wrong and especially morally blameworthy because it can turn this societal value on its head: Friesen at para. 65.
(g) Perpetrators of sexual violence against children commit their offences in secrecy, often using coercion to discourage child victims from reporting the crime. Offenders also rely on society’s naïve reluctance to recognize or acknowledge that such crimes are committed in their communities by individuals they know: Friesen at para. 67.
(h) It is not enough for courts to simply acknowledge the seriousness of sexual offences against children. The sentences imposed must actually reflect the gravity of the crime and the harm to the victims: Friesen at para. 76. 
(i) Physical contact of a sexual nature with a child always constitutes a wrongful act with both physical and psychological components, even when the conduct is not accompanied by additional physical violence and does not result in physical or psychological injury: Friesen at para. 77. Courts must reject the belief that there is no serious harm to children in the absence of additional physical violence: Friesen at para. 82.
(j) The harms caused by sexual violence against children include harm that manifests itself during childhood, and long term harm that only becomes evident during adulthood: Friesen at para. 80.
(k) Applying force of a sexual nature to children is always morally blameworthy. Such blameworthiness includes harm that was actually intended, and harm to which the offender is reckless or wilfully blind: Friesen at para. 88. 
(l) The moral blameworthiness of sexual violence also includes the recognition of the offender’s wrongful sexual exploitation and objectification of the victim. The degree of blameworthiness is higher when the victim is a child, because children are so vulnerable: Friesen at para. 89-90.
(m) Despite all of this, the sentencing court should not overlook factors that tend to diminish the offender’s blameworthiness, where they are present: Friesen at para. 91.

The Court went on to discuss a number of factors that may be considered in determining a fit sentence for sexual offences against children, namely

(a) likelihood of re-offence,
(b) abuse of a position of trust or authority,
(c) duration and frequency of the offending conduct,
(d) age of the victim, and
(e) degree of physical interference.

With regard to point (e), the degree of physical interference, the Court discouraged sentencing judges from downgrading the seriousness of the offence based principally on the notion that the particular acts in issue may not have been physically intrusive: Friesen at para. 144. Earlier in the judgment the Court discouraged sentencing judges from focusing on the presence or extent of physical injury, which could detract from a proper consideration of the psychological and emotional impacts of the crime on the victim: Friesen at para. 56, 77.
 

Friesen dealt with sentencing for sexual offences against children, and defined a child to be any victim under the age of 18. In Mr. Gaglardi’s case, seven of the 11 victims were under the age of 18 at the time that the offences were committed against them. The Friesen principles that I have just reviewed are directly applicable in their cases. The remaining four victims in this case were older than 18, although they were all relatively young, vulnerable men, and Mr. Gaglardi was much older. Thus, while the points in Friesen about sexual offences against children do not have direct application to the four counts involving adult victims, many of the Court’s remarks about the nature of sexual violence and its potential impacts on the victim are still informative. 
 

I will address the factors discussed in Friesen and how they apply in this case. To avoid unnecessary repetition, I will do so globally, rather than addressing each count and victim individually. It should be understood that, in taking this approach, I remain mindful that Mr. Gaglardi is being sentenced on 11 different counts, consisting of a variety of different offences, against 11 different victims. Certainly when it comes to considering the fit sentence for each count, I will focus on the particular offence, the extent of the offender’s blameworthiness for that offence, and the impact on that particular victim.
 

With regard to point (a), risk of re-offence, I have already noted that in this particular case, in view of Mr. Gaglardi’s age and his anticipated personal situation upon the completion of his sentence, the risk of re-offence is quite low. This is not a case where I must fashion a very lengthy sentence based principally or primarily out of concern for the need to protect the public from Mr. Gaglardi in the future. 
 

With regard to point (b), abuse of a position of trust or authority, this is now a statutory aggravating factor as set out in s. 718.2(a)(iii). This provision was first introduced in 1995. However, even before its codification, the common law recognized abuse of trust or authority as an aggravating feature in sentencing for sexual offences: R. v. S.B.T., 2010 BCCA 145 at para. 16. In the current matter, based on the findings set out in my reasons for judgment, I conclude that Mr. Gaglardi abused a position of trust in relation to each of the 11 victims. 
 

In the Vancouver counts, Mr. Gaglardi was in a position of trust in relation to each of the five victims. He was also in a position of actual authority in relation to some of the victims, due to his position at the Glad Tidings Academy. That is particularly the case with RF, where Mr. Gaglardi used his position in the school and, or the church to approach RF and effectively demand that he attend his office in order to be inspected for a venereal disease. In any event, in relation to all five Vancouver victims, Mr. Gaglardi abused a position of trust by using his status in the Glad Tidings organization and his particular relationship with each of the victims to furnish the opportunity to commit the offence. Many of the victims spoke in their trial testimony about how they trusted Mr. Gaglardi because of his status at the church and in the school, his title as a doctor, and in some cases his particularly close relationship with them. In each case Mr. Gaglardi betrayed that trust, and it is obvious from the victim impact statements that this betrayal of trust has had impacts and ripple effects on the victims in the years following the abuse.
 

In the Coquitlam counts, once again Mr. Gaglardi was in a position of trust in relation to each of the six victims. Many of the victims came to know Mr. Gaglardi through his association with the Hillside Community Church. While Mr. Gaglardi did not hold any formal office or position in the church, the evidence reflects that he was a person with some stature in the church organization. In addition to his affiliation with the church, there was also Mr. Gaglardi’s professed education and expertise. Mr. Gaglardi claimed to have a PhD, referred to himself as “Dr. Ray”, and represented that he had expertise in counselling and in various therapeutic techniques. All of the victims were much younger than Mr. Gaglardi. All of them were vulnerable and seeking guidance or assistance for challenges in their lives. All of the victims placed their trust in Mr. Gaglardi to help them. Mr. Gaglardi abused that trust by touching each of the victims in a sexual manner, sometimes using bizarre techniques as a ruse or rationale. The victims were led to believe that the conduct in issue was somehow for their benefit or their health. From the testimony of the witnesses at trial, their victim impact statement, and what they said in the pre-sentence report, one can see that the victims have been seriously impacted by the abuse of trust feature of Mr. Gaglardi’s crimes. It has caused them psychological and emotional trauma, undermining their self confidence and ability to trust others. Some have had to seek out counselling from properly trained professionals, simply to cope with the manner in which Mr. Gaglardi abused the trust that they placed in him. 
 

With regard to point (c), duration and frequency of the offending behaviour, this factor cuts both ways in the present case. On the one hand, this is not a case where any of the victims was serially abused in a repetitive way for months or years. In relation to each victim, there were between one and three instances of abuse. However, when one examines Mr. Gaglardi’s conduct globally, we can see that he abused a total of 11 victims over a span of 44 years. One cannot say that Mr. Gaglardi’s sexual misconduct was an isolated event in his life. During two phases of his life, over many years, Mr. Gaglardi acted opportunistically by using his relationships with boys or men who were much younger and less mature than him to engage in sexually inappropriate behaviour.
 

With regard to point (d), the age of the victim, in Mr. Gaglardi’s case the victims ranged in age from as young as 10 to as old as 30. To be fair and balanced, the victims were not children of tender years. However, many of the victims were children and all of them were much younger and less mature than Mr. Gaglardi at the time of the offending behaviour. The victims in the Vancouver counts were all under the age of 18 and some were much younger. It is of particular significance that the victims were adolescent males, each dealing with his own personal challenges, insecurities, emotional needs, and physical development at the time of the offending behaviour. The victims in the Coquitlam counts were somewhat older. Some were under the age of 18, but many were young adults. However, even in relation to these victims, all were much younger than Mr. Gaglardi, and much less mature than Mr. Gaglardi. In each case, Mr. Gaglardi took advantage of that when he victimized them.
 

With regard to point (e), degree of physical interference with the victim, it must be acknowledged that Mr. Gaglardi did not use any overt physical violence toward his victims, although I would be quick to point out the Court’s point in Friesen that any and all forms of sexual touching are inherently violent, because they involve non-consensual interference with the physical and sexual integrity of the victim. The forms of touching were certainly significant enough to be memorable to each of the victims. In many cases, the manner in which Mr. Gaglardi touched the victim was part of a ruse or staged procedure used by Mr. Gaglardi to obtain the victim’s tacit and uninformed consent. In some cases, the manner of touching was frankly bizarre. I should acknowledge that in some cases, the touching was only brief, lasting a matter of seconds, although as I explained in my reasons for judgment, even in those cases I was satisfied that the touching was intentional and that it was sexual in nature. Although the touching in Mr. Gaglardi’s case was not physically intrusive, I would not underestimate the degree of intrusion into the sexual integrity, autonomy, and dignity of each of the victims. In the Vancouver counts, the victims were all adolescent boys, and the evidence and victim impact statements indicate to me that Mr. Gaglardi’s conduct was, at the time, embarrassing, humiliating, and in the eyes of the victims, shameful. And in a number of cases the conduct had lasting impressions on the victim’s self image, self worth, and ability to trust. In the Coquitlam counts, in some cases the touching was very physically intrusive and in other cases it was less so. However, once again it is necessary to consider the impact on the sexual integrity, autonomy, and dignity of the victims. All of the Coquitlam victims were vulnerable boys or young men. Most saw Mr. Gaglardi for counselling, and in that context, Mr. Gaglardi used bizarre therapeutic techniques to provide an opportunity to intrude on the sexual integrity of the victims. Some of the victims have spoken explicitly about the manner in which Mr. Gaglardi’s conduct deprived them of dignity.
 

I turn next to a consideration of the principles and objectives of sentencing. 
 

The overarching point of sentencing is for the court to impose a sanction that is proportionate to the gravity of the crime and the degree of moral blameworthiness of the offender. This principle is now codified in s. 718.1, but has “long been central to Canadian sentencing”: Friesen at para. 30. In the present case, we must start from the footing that the offences were serious and that Mr. Gaglardi’s conduct was highly blameworthy.
 

The other sentencing objectives that are most relevant in this case are denunciation and general deterrence. 
 

Denunciation is the idea that the court should impose a sentence that reflects society’s condemnation of the crime: Friesen at para. 105; R. v. M.(C.A.), 1996 CanLII 230 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 500 at para. 81. Here, once again, it is acknowledged that sexual offences, particularly those involving both young victims and an abuse of a position of trust, involve conduct warranting severe rebuke in the form of a substantial jail sentence. 
 

General deterrence is the idea that the court should impose a sanction that will discourage other, like minded individuals in our society from committing similar criminal acts: R. v. B.W.P., 2006 SCC 27 at para. 2. One might be tempted to think that because Mr. Gaglardi’s conduct was so offensive and bizarre, there are not many others in the community who would commit acts of this sort. Unfortunately, the case law that has been presented to me shows that sexual offending of this sort is more common than anyone would hope, and, of course, there are regrettably, other cases where such abuse occurs but is never uncovered. Sentencing decisions dealing with offences of this sort must send a clear and consistent message that crimes of sexual violence will be met with substantial penalties.
 

Specific deterrence is also relevant, in that Mr. Gaglardi must receive a sentence that brings home to him personally the unacceptable nature of his conduct, so that it will not be repeated. Of course, as I have noted above, the risk of re-offence in this particular case is low, for other reasons.
 

That brings me to the issue of rehabilitation. In my view, rehabilitation is not a significant factor in this particular case, for several reasons. 
 

First, the case law acknowledges that for sexual offences involving young victims, and abuse of a position of trust, the sentencing objectives such as denunciation and deterrence should generally take priority over rehabilitation. I note that s. 718.01 – which provides that in sentencing for offences involving abuse of a person under 18 years of age, the court must give “primary consideration” to the objectives of denunciation and deterrence – was first enacted in 2005. This provision came into force after the most recent offence involving a child victim in Mr. Gaglardi’s case, and it cannot be applied retrospectively to his case. However, even before the introduction of this section, the common law placed priority on principles of denunciation and deterrence in cases of sexual offences against children, particularly where the offender abused a position of trust in committing the offence. The objective of rehabilitation is a much less important factor in such cases: see N.S.N.C. at para. 26, citing R. v. D.G., 2014 BCCA 84 at para. 16-17; R. v. S.B.T., 2010 BCCA 145 at para. 16; R. v. A.E.S., 2018 BCCA 478 at para. 54. See also R. v. Bremner, 2000 BCCA 345 at para. 34.
 

Second, since Mr. Gaglardi has not acknowledged doing anything wrong, his lack of insight or willingness to accept responsibility is a substantial impediment to full rehabilitation. Again, I acknowledge that lack of remorse is not an aggravating feature. However, where the offender does not accept responsibility for the offence, it is much more difficult for the court to fashion a sentence that focuses on issues such as offender re-integration. Still, even in this context, there is a hope and expectation that upon being sentenced, and while serving his sentence, Mr. Gaglardi will reflect upon and come to grips with his misconduct, so that he can move along the path of rehabilitation. 
 

Third, I have found that Mr. Gaglardi poses a low risk of re-offence. This is not because of rehabilitation, but because in my view his risk factors are such that he will not be in a position to commit further offences in the future. So, in sentencing Mr. Gaglardi, the Court is not pre-occupied with finding a disposition that is tailored to address his treatment needs or risk factors.
 

For all of these reasons, rehabilitation will not be not a central or controlling feature in the sentence that Mr. Gaglardi is to receive.
 

Another important sentencing objective or sentencing principle is the idea that similar offences committed by offenders in similar circumstances should receive comparable sentences. This is known as the parity principle. Even before its codification in s. 718.2(b) of the Criminal Code, this principle has been a well-known feature of sentencing in our justice system: Friesen at para. 31. Parity is important because it introduces a level of objectivity and rationality to sentencing. However, it is often difficult to achieve in practice, because sentencing is an individualized process. No two cases are exactly alike, and of course every offender is an individual with a unique background and personal circumstances. In R. v. Parranto, 2021 SCC 46 at para. 11-12, Justices Brown and Martin acknowledged the inherent tension between the principles of parity and individualization, but went on to explain that both are accounted for within the overarching principle of proportionality. See also Friesen at para. 32. 
 

In considering the principle of parity, the added difficulty in the present case is that some of the sentencing decisions that are perhaps most similar or most comparable on their facts are what I have referred to as pre-Friesen cases. Without repeating everything I have said above, that is relevant because Friesen provides important common law guidance as to how courts should view the seriousness, harmfulness, and moral blameworthiness of offences involving sexual violence against children, and how all of this should actually be reflected in the determination of a fit sentence. So the pre-Friesen cases have to be read in that light.
 

With regard to the Vancouver counts, the Crown cites R. v. R.C., 2022 ONCA 389 as a useful sentencing precedent. That case involved a 70 year old offender who entered a guilty plea to a single count of indecent assault that had occurred some 50 years earlier. At the time of the offence, the victim was 12 or 13 and the offender was 21. The offence involved a single incident that occurred when the victim and the victim’s brother were staying over night at the accused’s residence. The accused entered the bedroom where the victim and his brother were sleeping, gave the victim alcohol, and then engaged in various forms of overtly sexual touching. The incident ended when the victim began to cry. As I say, the offender was 70 years old at the time of sentencing. This was a post-Friesen case, and both the trial judge and the appeal court took the Friesen principles into account. The appeal court agreed with the trial judge that the now repealed offence of indecent assault was most comparable to the current offence of sexual interference. The sentencing judge imposed a jail term of nine months for this single count. The appeal court affirmed that sentence, but in doing so, commented that it was at the lower end of the appropriate range for such a case.
 
I would say that R.C. offers some guidance in terms of the fit sentence for a single incident of indecent assault. However, the circumstances were somewhat more favourable to the offender, or less aggravated than the matters that I am dealing with in a number of respects. First, there was a guilty plea, meaning that the offender was entitled to some credit for both avoiding a trial and for acknowledging responsibility for his conduct. Second, while there was a relationship of trust or authority, I would say that in the case at bar the nature of Mr. Gaglardi’s position of trust and authority, and the manner in which he used it to commit the Vancouver offences was much more aggravated. Certainly, the Court in R.C. did note the abuse of trust, as well as the harmful, life-long impact of the crime on the victim.
 
The Crown also cites Gerrard, to which I have referred earlier in my reasons. That case involved sentencing of an offender convicted after trial of a single count of sexual interference. The offence occurred in the mid 1990s, at which time the victim was 11 to 12 years old and the offender was in his mid to late 30s. The victim was attending a sleepover with the offender’s daughter. The offender entered the room where the victim was sleeping and touched her breasts and also placed his hand inside her underwear. The incident ended when the offender bumped into a night stand and his daughter awoke. The offender had no prior criminal record and no subsequent arrests or involvements with the justice system. This was once again a post-Friesen case. The sentencing judge imposed a 20 month jail term followed by probation.
 
In Gerrard at para. 64, the sentencing judge appeared to apply not just the general principles articulated in Friesen, but also the more specific guidance about sentencing ranges at para. 110 of the Friesen decision. For my part, I agree with the sentiment expressed at para. 36 of N.S.N.C. that the comment at para. 110 of Friesen about particular sentencing ranges is not readily transposable to offences committed prior to the Criminal Code amendments relied upon to signal the legislature’s mandate for an increase in the severity of sentences. Nevertheless, I find that Gerrard offers some guidance in terms of identifying a proper range of sentence for offences of sexual interference. I would say that the abuse of trust feature of the Gerrard case, even though it was described by the sentencing judge as multi-layered and profound, was not as aggravated as it was in relation to the Vancouver counts in the case before me.
 
With regard to the Coquitlam counts, I have been referred to a number of cases of sexual offences committed in the context of what the parties have referred to as treatment or therapeutic relationships. I am not going to review all of them. I will simply comment on the cases which in my view bear the greatest degree of similarity to the case before me.
 
The offender in R. v. Baltazar, 2021 ABQB 879 was a registered massage therapist who was convicted after trial of 11 counts of sexual assault. The offences involved inappropriate sexual touching of the genital areas of 11 separate victims, during massage therapy sessions. All of the victims were adult males. The offender was in his early 40s at the time of sentencing. The sentencing judge found that he had no insight into the nature of his offences or the impact on his victims. The offender had community support but the sentencing judge considered that to be of little weight given that sexual offences of this sort can be perpetrated by individuals who might otherwise present as upstanding members of the community. The judge found that the conduct was predatory and involved an abuse of trust. As in the case at bar, there was compelling evidence of the negative impact that the offences had on a number of the victims. The sentencing judge determined that the appropriate sentence for each count ranged from two to six months in jail to be served consecutively, for a total of 42 months, which the judge then reduced under the totality principle to produce a net sentence of 31 months in jail.
 
In many ways, the offender’s misconduct in Baltazar is comparable to Mr. Gaglardi’s misconduct in the Coquitlam counts. However, in my view Mr. Gaglardi’s conduct was different and more aggravated in two respects. The first difference has to do with the age and circumstances of the victims. Two of the six victims in the Coquitlam counts were under the age of 18. All of them were much younger and less mature than Mr. Gaglardi. The second difference has to do with the nature of the trust relationship. Mr. Gaglardi was a trusted member of a church community, who used his position and his stated education and experience to gain the trust of the victims. All of the victims in the Coquitlam counts were vulnerable boys or young men, seeking assistance for personal problems in their lives. Mr. Gaglardi exploited their vulnerability. In this sense, Mr. Gaglardi’s conduct involved a much more aggravated and damaging betrayal of trust that was the case with the offender in Baltazar. 
 
In R. v. Swope, 2015 BCCA 167, the offender was convicted after a trial of six counts of indecent assault committed in the early 1980s, against students in the offender’s grade two class. The victims were all between six and eight years of age, and the offender was in his early 40s. The assaults ranged from rubbing the complainant along her thigh over the underwear to rubbing the complainant’s vagina underneath the underwear. Each of the victims was assaulted a minimum of three times, and some were assaulted on a daily basis throughout an entire school year. By the time of sentencing, the offender was 78 years old and in poor health. The sentencing judge determined that the fit sentence was between six and 18 months per count, to be served consecutively for a total of 76 months, which the judge then reduced by one half on account of the totality principle. The resulting 38 month penitentiary sentence was upheld on appeal.
 
In affirming the sentence, the Court of Appeal gave particular attention to the offender’s age and health. Speaking for the Court, Justice Groberman recognized that sentencing judges should generally avoid the imposition of a fixed-term sentence that “so greatly exceeds the offender’s expected remaining life span” that “traditional goals of sentencing” have “all but depleted their functional value”: Swope at para. 32, citing R. v. C.A.M., 1996 CanLII 230 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 500 at para. 92. The court should be “cognizant” of an elderly offender’s limited life expectancy in assessing the overall “severity of the sentence”. Although this consideration should not overwhelm the analysis, there must be “scope for courts to be compassionate towards aged and infirm persons in the course of sentencing”: Swope at para. 32-35. Even though the offender in Swope was 78 years old, the Court was not convinced that the 38 month jail sentence imposed by the court below was “overly-long or oppressive”: Swope at para. 36. 
 
I was referred to a long list of other cases involving sentencing for sexual offences perpetrated by treatment providers or other professionals against their patients or clients. I found most of them to be unhelpful, because they are “pre-Friesen” sentencing precedents. 
 
By way of example, the defence suggested that R. v. Alfred, 1998 CanLII 5364 (ON CA) is a useful comparator. I do not agree. Although the conduct in issue might have been comparable in that it involved multiple counts of sexual touching of children by a physician in the course of clinic visits, the court’s approach to the structure of the sentence is not helpful or apt in this case. To explain, the sentencing judge imposed a conditional sentence for some counts in combination with a custodial sentence on others. The appeal court found this to be an error and corrected it, but even after that imposed a combination of concurrent and consecutive sentences totalling 25 months in jail. Above and beyond my concern about the structure of the sentence itself, I note that this is a pre-Friesen case decided without the benefit of the Supreme Court of Canada’s guidance on the need to impose sentences that truly reflect the gravity and moral blameworthiness of offences of sexual violence against children.
 
The sentence that is imposed on Mr. Gaglardi must take into account both the aggravating and mitigating circumstances.
 
In assessing Mr. Gaglardi’s overall moral blameworthiness, I find that there are a number of aggravating features in the present case, specifically:

(i) the serious abuse of trust relationships,
(ii) the age and vulnerability of the victims,
(iii) the number of victims,
(iv) the substantial and enduring victim impacts, and
(v) the duration of time over which the offences were committed.
 
On the other side of the scale, there are two identifiable mitigating features. 
 
The most significant point of mitigation is the advanced age and health challenges faced by the offender at the time of sentencing. Although this does not mitigate Mr. Gaglardi’s culpability, it is a factor that causes the Court to carefully examine the duration of the sentence to be imposed. The sentence should not be any longer than necessary, and the Court must be mindful of its effect upon a person who is in his late 70s. 
 
Another mitigating feature is the absence of any prior record, and the existence of some continuing community support for the offender. I hasten to add that this factor is of very limited weight in the case at bar, because the fact is that Mr. Gaglardi was able to engage in the offending conduct over more than four decades without it coming to light in a manner that would put a stop to it. This was at least in part because of Mr. Gaglardi’s stature in the community and his ability to carry on these acts in private without the knowledge of those who would otherwise consider him to be a contributing member of the community. Determination of the Fit Sentence for Each Count
 
On count 3, indecent assault of RF, the Crown suggests a sentence of 18 to 24 months in jail. The defence argues for a sentence of six months. There were two separate incidents, both of which involved a significant abuse by Mr. Gaglardi of a position of authority and trust. The impact on the victim was substantial and prolonged. The victim’s sexual integrity was violated, and his family relationships were damaged, irreparably. I find that the proper sentence is 20 months in jail.
 
On count 5, indecent assault of GP, the Crown suggests a sentence of 12 to 18 months in jail. The defence says the Court should impose a three month jail sentence. This offence involved a single incident of unwanted touching, that was brief in nature. However, the victim was an extremely vulnerable boy, highly influential, in need of positive male role models in his life. His vulnerability was exploited, and his trust was betrayed and broken. A jail sentence of eight months is required.
 
On count 6, indecent assault of RM, the Crown argues for a sentence of 18 to 24 months. The defence submits that Mr. Gaglardi should receive a three month jail sentence. This offence involved a single incident of inappropriate touching. However, once again the victim was a vulnerable adolescent boy, with body image issues, seeking advice from someone he trusted. Mr. Gaglardi’s conduct was manipulative, and it was a serious betrayal of trust. A sentence of 15 months in jail is required.
 
On count 8, indecent assault of DP, the Crown recommends a sentence of 24 to 30 months in jail. The defence says 12 months. This offence involved a single incident, but the incident involved an elaborate ploy built upon Mr. Gaglardi’s professed expertise and academic interest, used to exploit and violate the sexual integrity of an adolescent boy. The betrayal of trust was profound. The impacts on the victim were immediate, and also prolonged and insidious. A jail sentence of 21 months is required.
 
On count 10, indecent assault of KH, the Crown suggests a 24 to 30 months jail sentence. The defence says 12 months. There were two instances in which Mr. Gaglardi intruded on KH’s sexual integrity. Again, the victim was vulnerable, and Mr. Gaglardi used his position in the church and his relationship with KH to opportunistically prey upon him. The impact on the victim was once again substantial. A jail sentence of 21 months is required.
 
On count 12, sexual assault of ML, the Crown asks the Court to impose a sentence of 24 to 36 months in jail. The defence argues for a sentence of 12 months. The offence involved three separate instances of improper sexual contact. The victim was not a child, but had just turned 18, and was extremely vulnerable, seeking help from Mr. Gaglardi for a drug dependency. Mr. Gaglardi’s conduct was manipulative and exploitative. A fit sentence for this count is 16 months in jail.
 
On count 13, sexual exploitation of GA, the Crown suggests a 24 to 36 month jail sentence. The defence submits that a fit sentence is 12 to 18 months. There were two instances of sexually offensive behaviour. The evidence at trial reflects that Mr. Gaglardi used his status within the Hillside church, and his purported educational background and professional interests to draw GA into a bizarre ritual that was presented to GA as some kind of a research project. Mr. Gaglardi paid GA to participate. In the course of that project, Mr. Gaglardi engaged in increasingly intrusive examinations of GA’s body, leading ultimately to inappropriate sexual touching. There was also the bizarre coffee enema procedure. Mr. Gaglardi’s conduct was exploitative and manipulative. Again, the victim’s trust was betrayed. Some years later, GA tried to raise the issue with Mr. Gaglardi in an effort to heal the relationship, but Mr. Gaglardi sloughed him off. A sentence of 15 months in jail is required. 
 
On count 15, sexual exploitation of JU, the Crown argues for a sentence of 24 to 36 months in jail. The defence suggests a sentence of nine to 12 months. The offence involved a single instance of inappropriate sexual touching. However, the incident was intrusive of the victim’s sexual integrity, and the victim was an extremely vulnerable teenager. He felt isolated and in need of companionship and emotional support. He placed his trust in Mr. Gaglardi, who betrayed it, leaving JU heartbroken at the time. A sentence of 16 months is required on this count. 
 
On count 20, sexual assault of AH, the Crown recommends a sentence of 12 to 18 months in jail. The defence suggests a sentence of two to six months. The offence involved two instances of sexual touching. The victim, while an adult, was once again vulnerable, lacking in self confidence and seeking assistance from a qualified professional. He placed his trust in Mr. Gaglardi, who then pressured him to submit to increasingly intrusive, bizarre therapeutic techniques that intruded on the victim’s sexual integrity. AH’s victim impact statement indicates that he has been gravely affected by Mr. Gaglardi’s conduct in abusing the trust that AH placed in him. A fit sentence for this count is 10 months in jail.
 
On count 23, sexual assault of CP, the Crown recommends an 18 to 24 month jail sentence. The defence says four months. This count involved two instances of sexual touching. The victim was a young man who sought out Mr. Gaglardi’s services as a counsellor. On two of the relatively few instances when they met in person, Mr. Gaglardi touched him sexually, once during a massage, and once during a peculiar and entirely unnecessary or gratuitous anal swabbing exercise that I found to be a ruse. I find that a sentence of eight months in jail is required for this count.
 
On count 25, sexual assault of JK, the Crown suggests a sentence of six to 12 months in jail. The defence position is two months. This offence involved a single incident of sexual contact. JK, having experienced trauma in the past, sought Mr. Gaglardi’s assistance as a counsellor. Mr. Gaglardi said he would counsel JK for free as part of some sort of study. JK trusted Mr. Gaglardi because of what he was told about his education and professional experience. Mr. Gaglardi abused that trust and took advantage of JK’s vulnerability. JK has suffered lasting impact from the abuse, requiring ongoing counselling to come to grips with the manner in which Mr. Gaglardi abused the relationship. A fit sentence for this count is five months in jail.
 
Given that each offence relates to a separate victim and involves a separate transaction or series of events, the sentences must be consecutive. The total sentence is 155 months, which works out to 12 years and 11 months.
 
However, that is not the end of the exercise. I must go on to consider the principle of totality. Where consecutive sentences are imposed, the Court must take one last look at the total sentence to ensure that it properly reflects the offender’s overall moral blameworthiness, and is not crushing. See Friesen at para. 157, citing R. v. Punko, 2010 BCCA 365 at para. 93; see also R. v. Li, 2009 BCCA 5 at para. 27-28.
 
In Mr. Gaglardi’s case, I would not necessarily consider a jail sentence of almost 13 years to be completely out of line with the offender’s overall moral blameworthiness, but looking at Mr. Gaglardi’s personal circumstances I do have concerns about whether a sentence of that duration would be crushing due to his age and health situation. As explained in Swope at para. 33, time in jail may be “particularly harsh” for an elderly offender as the opportunity for liberty slips away with age.
 
Mr. Gaglardi is 78 years old. There is no evidence that his life expectancy is significantly curtailed by illness, however a sentence of almost 13 years may well approximate his life expectancy. Taking this into account, I agree with the submission of both parties that the sentence should be reduced to account for Mr. Gaglardi’s advanced age. In Swope, the sentencing judge reduced the sentence for a 78 year old offender by half. The Crown and defence both suggest a similar approach in the case at bar, and I agree. While this is a substantial reduction in the overall sentence, it is in my view necessary to avoid the injustice of a sentence that would be crushing to Mr. Gaglardi.
 
In the result, I would reduce the overall sentence to 78 months, or 6 years and six months. To accomplish this, I will reduce the length of each sentence by more or less one-half, rounded off in some cases to avoid partial months, as follows:
(a) On count 3, the sentence is 10 months in jail, consecutive to all other counts. 
(b) On count 5, I impose four months in jail, consecutive to all other counts.
(c) On count 6, I impose seven months in jail, consecutive to all other counts.
(d) On count 8, I impose 11 months in jail, consecutive to all other counts.
(d) On count 10, I impose 11 months in jail, consecutive to all other counts.
(e) On count 12, I impose eight months in jail, consecutive to all other counts. 
(f)On count 13, I impose seven months in jail, consecutive to all other counts.
(g) On count 15, I impose eight months in jail, consecutive to all other counts.
(h) On count 20, I impose five months in jail, consecutive to all other counts.
(i) On count 23, I impose four months in jail, consecutive to all other counts.
(j) On count 25, I impose three months in jail, consecutive to all other counts. Ancillary Orders
 
I hereby order that as part of his sentence Mr. Gaglardi is to provide a DNA sample pursuant to s. 487.051 of the Criminal Code.
 
There will also be an order pursuant to s. 490.012 of the Criminal Code that Mr. Gaglardi is to register under the Sex Offender Information Registration Act for a period of 20 years.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/sc/2023bcsc141.html
 


THE COURT: The accused, Michael Kenneth Robert Matson, was convicted of the following three counts on Court File Number 48872‑2 out of the Prince George registry after a trial: Count 1 . . . on or about the 25th day of October, 2019, at or near the City of Mackenzie, in the Province of British Columbia, did unlawfully possess a controlled substance, to wit: Methamphetamine, for the purpose of trafficking, contrary to Section 5(2) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act. Count 2 . . . on or about the 25th day of October, 2019, at or near the City of Mackenzie, in the Province of British Columbia, did unlawfully possess a controlled substance, to wit: Heroin and Fentanyl, for the purpose of trafficking, contrary to Section 5(2) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act. Count 3 . . . on or about the 25th day of October, 2019, at or near the City of Mackenzie, in the Province of British Columbia, did unlawfully possess a controlled substance, to wit: Cocaine, contrary to Section 4(1) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act. Background
 


By way of background, on October 25, 2019, Constable Del Vecchio, a member of the RCMP stationed in Mackenzie, British Columbia, obtained a search warrant to search 221 Crysdale Drive in Mackenzie, British Columbia (the “Residence”) for drugs and drug trafficking items pursuant to s. 11 of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (“CDSA”). 
 


The RCMP members attended the residence at 7:10 pm to execute the search warrant. In the basement bedroom of the Residence, the RCMP found a small plastic bag containing 8.3 grams of methamphetamine in a grey bag in the corner of that bedroom.
 


In addition, in the basement bedroom, a small wooden box was found on a shelf with two plastic baggies. One baggie contained 2.5 grams of cocaine and the other baggie contained 2.9 grams of heroin with fentanyl. 
 


Sergeant Grierson observed the accused leaving a hidden room in the basement. The police found a small plastic bag packed between what appeared to be a vent and that contained two other bags. One of the bags contained 55.8 grams of methamphetamine and the other baggie contained 28 grams of heroin and fentanyl. 
 


Exhibit 1 on the trial are Admissions of Fact made pursuant to s. 655 of the Criminal Code of Canada.
 


The accused admitted that the value of the methamphetamine, if sold at the street level, would be $6,510 and if sold in large amounts its value would be roughly $2,600 to $3,200. 
 


The accused further admitted that the value of the heroin and fentanyl, if sold at the ounce level, would be approximately $3,000 to $4,000. If sold at the street level, that is the .1‑gram level, the value would be approximately $6,180. 
 


The accused admitted the value of the cocaine seized would be approximately $200 if sold at the half‑gram level.
 
 Finally, in Exhibit 1, the accused admitted that the methamphetamine and the heroin and fentanyl were for the purpose of trafficking.
 
 Exhibit 4 on this trial are further Admissions of Fact by the accused, pursuant to s. 655 of the Criminal Code. In these admissions, the accused admits that he possessed the above‑noted drugs. Accused
 
 The accused is 35 years of age, having been born on August 14, 1986. He was born in Burnaby, British Columbia; however, moved with his family to Mackenzie when he was young. He has two younger siblings.
 
 The accused has two children from a previous relationship.
 
 The accused has a Grade 10 education and he has been employed in a variety of labour‑type jobs.
 
 The accused has a criminal record, which includes convictions for possession of controlled substances, as well as uttering threats. The accused also has seven previous convictions for failing to comply with undertakings and/or probation orders.
 

I have had the benefit of a pre-sentence report prepared by Probation Officer Paul Weisbrodt dated April 14, 2022.
 

Mr. Weisbrodt, under the heading "Behaviour, Emotional Status" writes the following: 
The subject reported he was attacked by a dog when he was 6 years of age, where he suffered serious head wounds. The subject also recalled an incident from 2017, when he received another severe head wound, as he was ejected through a windshield during a motor vehicle accident. The subject indicated he still has glass embedded in his skull, but he does not believe he has suffered any brain injury due to the accident. The subject also recalled experiencing a drive-by shooting in 2016, where he has experienced some incidents of post-traumatic stress, which included him reacting to incidents of loud noises, screeching tires, and sometimes having nightmares. The subject recalled being very depressed in February 2019, and not happy with his life due to the choices he had made. The subject reported he was going to drive his vehicle off a cliff and commit suicide, but the vehicle broke down, ending his attempt. The subject indicated this changed his life and he claims he has tried to make positive changes. The subject indicated he has dealt with most of his past issues and does not feel he requires counselling at this time. The subject indicated he has the support of his family and his girlfriend, and he is happy with his life at present.
 
 Mr. Weisbrodt also reported that the accused has had difficulty complying with community supervision. He indicated that the accused's “reporting habits were sporadic and this limited the effectiveness of community supervision”.
 

The accused did, however, complete the CORE-Essential Skills for Success for substance abuse (three modules) prior to his release in January 2019, and the accused also completed the Core-Respectful Relationship program in October 2019 while on probation. Position of the Parties Crown
 
 The Crown says that a fit global sentence would be 34 months in jail. That would consist of 18 months in jail on Count 1, 34 months in jail on Count 2, and 12 months in jail on Count 3, all served concurrently.
 
 The Crown notes that the accused has a previous criminal record, though most of those offences occurred after 2019. 
 
 The Crown relies on the following cases to establish the range for a fit sentence:




 
i.

 
R. v. Smith, 2017 BCCA 112;



 
ii.

 
R. v. Mann 2018 BCCA 265;



 
iii.

 
R. v. Aeichele 2022 BCSC 195;



 
iv.

 
R. v. Grouhel 2021 BCSC 2527;



 
v.

 
R. v. Emery 2019 BCSC 1789;



 
vi.

 
R. v. Lucas 2020 BCPC 106;




vii.

 
R. v. Gill 2021 BCSC 2269;


 
viii.

 
R. v. Kirton 2018 BCPC 11; and



 
ix.

 
R. v. Adamu 2020 BCSC 98
 

In Smith, the court stated the following with regard to the range of sentence for trafficking in fentanyl and other serious drugs at para. 45: I agree with the many judges who have stated that denunciation and deterrence must generally be given primacy in sentencing in cases involving Fentanyl. To this end, I would suggest a normal range beginning at 18 months’ imprisonment, as the Crown suggests. I would place Mr. Smith’s offences at the bottom of this range, in light of the mitigating factors discussed by the court below. I do not believe it is necessary for us to specify the top of the range, although I would suggest it might well exceed 36 months, especially where the offender has a substantial record involving the sale of Fentanyl or otherwise demonstrates an indifference to the human lives he or she is putting at risk. . . . 
 
 The Crown notes that the accused has a number of aggravating factors. These include the fact that he was on probation at the time of these offences and the amount of fentanyl that he had in his possession. The accused also has a criminal record which includes a previous conviction for possession of narcotics.
 
 The Crown argues that based on the case law, the starting point for a fit sentence for the accused would be 30 months. However, given the amount of drugs he had in his possession, 34 months is the appropriate sentence.
 
 The Crown argues that a Conditional Sentence Order is not available to the accused because a fit sentence would require more than two years in custody. Also, the accused has not established any exceptional circumstances which would allow for a reduced sentence for the accused.
 
 The Crown also seeks a forfeiture order pursuant to s. 16 of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, a DNA order, and a firearms prohibition pursuant to s. 109 of the Criminal Code. Accused
 
 The accused argues that a fit sentence would be a Conditional Sentence. It would address the principles of denunciation and deterrence, as well as rehabilitation.
 
 The accused notes that Bill C‑5 has been given Royal assent and a Conditional Sentence Order is available to the accused.
 
 The accused lives in a basement suite in Mackenzie, British Columbia. Exhibit 4 on this sentencing hearing is a letter from a Mr. Goodwin, which indicates that the accused has been working for him for the past five months.
 
 The accused argues that he has suffered from depression as a result of the breakdown of the relationship he had with the mother of his children in 2018, and that he started using and selling drugs then to support his habit.
 
 The accused disagrees with the comments in the pre-sentence report that he was not addicted to drugs at the time of these offences. He said this has been a lifelong struggle for him.
 
 The accused notes that he has done a lot of work to assist in his rehabilitation and has taken a number of courses, as indicated by the certificates which have been marked as Exhibit 6 on this proceeding. 
 
 The accused argues that he had to drop out of school when his father left his family, and he began to work to support his family at a young age.
 
 The accused notes that he has suffered many traumas throughout his life, as documented in the pre-sentence report. 
 
 In addition, this morning I heard from one of his counsellors or facilitators in his rehabilitation who indicates that for the past five months, he has been doing well in recovery, attending NA meetings regularly, and is an inspiration to other people in their recovery. I accept that.
 
 The accused argues that he is by no means a prolific offender. He is not a danger to the public, and a Conditional Sentence Order can meet the requirements for deterrence and denunciation. 
 
 The accused relies on the following cases to establish a fit sentence:








i.

 
R. v. Flintroy 2021 BCSC 1187;






 
ii.

 
R. v. Voong, 2015 BCCA 285;







iii.

 
R. v. Proulx 2000 SCC 5;







iv.

 
R. v. Ali 2022 BCPC 35; and






 
v.

 
R. v. Howard 2021 BCPC 167
 

Mr. Justice Crossin in Flintroy, in referring to the decision of Voong, stated the following at para. 45: In circumstances of far less sophistication and seriousness than the case at bar, the courts have recognized that deterrence and denunciation can be met without conventional incarceration in certain particular and special circumstances. This is achieved by suspending the passing of sentencing in ordering a term of probation. The court in R. v. Voong, 2015 BCCA 285, stated at para. 59: In summary, absent exceptional circumstances, the sentence for a first offence or with a minimal criminal record, dial-a-dope drug seller will be in the range of six to eighteen months imprisonment, depending on the aggravating circumstances. Exceptional circumstances may include a combination of no criminal record, significant and objectively identifiable steps towards rehabilitation for the drug addict, gainful employment, remorse and acknowledgement of the harm done to society as a result of the offences, as opposed to harm done to the offender as a result of being caught. This is a non-exhaustive list, but at the end of the day, there must be circumstances that are above and beyond the norm to justify a non-custodial sentence. There must be something that would lead a sentencing judge to conclude that the offender had truly turned his or her life around, and that the protection of the public was subsequently better served by a non-custodial sentence. However, Parliament, while not removing a non-custodial sentence for this type of offence, has concluded that CSO sentences are not available. Thus, it will be the rare case where the standard of exceptional circumstances is met.
 
 The accused argues that the cases that the Crown relies on are distinguishable because the circumstances in those cases are more aggravating or the offender had a more significant criminal record.
 
 The accused argues that the court should consider, in determining a fit sentence, that he has been struggling with addiction issues, has turned his life around, gained employment, and is attending counselling for his rehabilitation.
 
 The accused argues that a conditional sentence is available to him and would fulfil the requirements of deterrence and denunciation.
 
 The accused acknowledges that he has been sober for five months and that he has to do better in his life, and he acknowledges that he deserves or accepts whatever sentence that he is given. Decision
 

I have to consider the purpose and principles of sentencing as set out in the Criminal Code in determining a fit sentence.
 

Section 718 of the Criminal Code outlines the purpose of sentencing and reads as follows: The fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society and to contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions that have one or more of the following objectives: (a) to denounce unlawful conduct and the harm done to victims or to the community that is caused by unlawful conduct; (b) to deter the offender and other persons from committing offences; (c) to separate offenders from society, where necessary; (d) to assist in rehabilitating offenders; (e) to provide reparations for harm done to victims or to the community; and (f) to promote a sense of responsibility in offenders, and acknowledgment of the harm done to victims or to the community.
 

Section 718.1 of the Criminal Code of Canada reads: A sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.
 

Section 718.2 also provides the court with guidance as to other sentencing principles and reads: A court that imposes a sentence shall also take into consideration the following principles: (a) a sentence should be increased or reduced to account for any relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or the offender, and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, . . . 
(iii.1) evidence that the offence had a significant impact on the victim, considering their age and other personal circumstances, including their health and financial situation, . . . 
shall be deemed to be aggravating circumstances; (b) a sentence should be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences committed in similar circumstances; (c) where consecutive sentences are imposed, the combined sentence should not be unduly long or harsh; (d) an offender should not be deprived of liberty, if less restrictive sanctions may be appropriate in the circumstances; and (e) all available sanctions, other than imprisonment, that are reasonable in the circumstances and consistent with the harm done to victims or to the community should be considered for all offenders, with particular attention to the circumstances of Aboriginal offenders.
 

I must also consider s. 10 of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, which reads: 10(1) 
Without restricting the generality of the Criminal Code, the fundamental purpose of any sentence for an offence under this Part is to contribute to the respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society while encouraging rehabilitation, and treatment in appropriate circumstances, of offenders and acknowledging the harm done to victims and to the community.
 
 There is no question that society is harmed every day by the sale of illicit drugs and in particular fentanyl which is a scourge on society. The amount of deaths in British Columbia as a result of fentanyl is mind‑boggling and unacceptable.
 
 The accused was in possession of a relatively large amount of illicit drugs and a large amount of fentanyl at the time of his arrest. 
 
 The accused has a relatively lengthy criminal record with two prior convictions for possession of controlled substances. Perhaps more importantly, the accused also has convictions for uttering threats and numerous breaches of court orders.
 
 It is clear in the case law that anyone convicted of trafficking in fentanyl, absent exceptional circumstances, should expect to go to jail for a lengthy period of time. 
 
 The accused is remorseful for these offences, which I accept. He has taken a number of steps towards his rehabilitation, including five months of sobriety, and has found employment and, as I earlier said, he has members of the community speaking highly of him with regard to his efforts at rehabilitation.
 
 The accused is well on his way to rehabilitating himself and turning his life around. However, in my view, there are not exceptional circumstances in this case as described in Flintroy, where the accused in that case, six years later, had turned their life completely around. 
 
 There are aggravating factors in this case, including the fact that the accused was on probation at the time of these offences. While I accept the accused was likely, to some degree, supporting his own habit, given the amounts of drugs, it is clear he was also selling these drugs. He had a relatively large amount of narcotics, including fentanyl, in his possession.
 
 The accused does have mitigating factors which include his efforts at rehabilitation, finding employment, and his sobriety.
 
 In my view, a Conditional Sentence Order is not appropriate in the circumstances of this case primarily for two reasons. First, a fit sentence would require more than two years of incarceration and, given the accused's poor track record for complying with court orders, I have no faith that he would comply with the conditions of the conditional sentence order if he was placed on it, which would put society at risk.
 
 I am, however, mindful of the efforts of rehabilitation made by the accused and the principle of restraint in coming to a decision as to a fit sentence. 
 
 So sir, if you could stand up, please. I am not in a position to grant you a conditional sentence order. In my view, there needs to be more than two years' incarceration. I am giving you a considerable discount, though, from what the Crown is asking, based on your efforts at rehabilitation. 
 
 So I am going to sentence you to a total of 28 months in custody. That will be broken down as follows: Count 1, 18 months in custody; Count 2, 28 months in custody; and Count 3, eight months in custody.
 
 All the sentences are to be served concurrently, one with the other, so again that is a total of 28 months.
 
 You can have a seat, sir.
 
 In addition, I will make the following ancillary orders. 
 
 Count 2 on the information is a secondary designated offence. After considering the factors set out in s. 487.051(3) of the Criminal Code, I am satisfied that it is in the best interests of the administration of justice to authorize the taking of samples of bodily substance from you. The samples will be taken from you while you are in custody and you must submit to the taking of the samples.
 
 Next, pursuant to s. 109 of the Criminal Code, you are prohibited from possessing any firearm, other than a prohibited firearm or restricted firearm, and any cross-bow, restricted weapon, ammunition, explosive substance for a period of 10 years following your release from prison, and any prohibited firearm or restricted firearm, prohibited weapon, prohibited device, and prohibited ammunition for life. 
 
 And thirdly, Crown is seeking a forfeiture order pursuant to s. 16. Do you have that order, by any chance?
 
 CNSL A. MURRAY: Yes, Mr. Justice, we do. It’s signed by both my friend and I. I’ve revised it, just to put today’s date on it, and it’s – 
 
 THE COURT: All right.
 
 CNSL A. MURRAY: ‑‑ ready for your – Mr. Justice’s signature.
 
 THE COURT: All right. I will sign that order. I am satisfied that the conditions of s. 16 have been met and the item should be forfeited to the Crown. I will hand that back to Madam Clerk.
 
 All right, so 28 months is the total sentence. Thank you.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/pc/2023bcpc5.html
 


On September 28, 2022, after a multiday trial, I found that the Public Prosecution Service of Canada ("PPSC") had proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Adam Munro committed the offences alleged in counts 1 and 3 of Court Information 6931-1, and that Silas Levesque committed the offences alleged in counts 1, 3 and 4 of Court Information 6931-1: Count 1
Adam Munro, Silas Levesque, and ATM Fishing Ltd., between July 22, 2018, and August 9, 2018, at or near the Village of Masset, in the Province of British Columbia, while carrying out activities under the authority of a licence, to wit, Salmon Area F Salmon Troll Licence 2018, did contravene or fail to comply with a condition of the licence, to wit: Fishing for Chinook shall cease when the maximum set out in subsection 1(1)(a)(i) is reached, contrary to Section 22(7) of the Fishery (General) Regulations, and did thereby commit an offence contrary to Section 78(a) of the Fisheries Act. Count 3
Adam Munro, Silas Levesque, and ATM Fishing Ltd., between July 22, 2018, and August 15, 2018, at or near the Village of Masset, in the Province of British Columbia, and elsewhere in the Province of British Columbia, did possess fish caught in contravention of the Fisheries Act or its regulations contrary to Section 33 of the Fisheries Act, and did thereby commit an offence contrary to Section 78(a) of the Fisheries Act. Count 4
Silas Levesque, between July 28, 2018, and November 5, 2019, at or near the Village of Masset, in the Province of British Columbia, while carrying out activities under the authority of a licence, to wit, Salmon Area F Salmon Troll Licence 2018, did contravene or fail to comply with a condition of licence, to wit: the vessel master shall submit fish slips as required by licence not later than seven (7) days after landing, contrary to Section 22(7) of the Fishery (General) Regulations, and did thereby commit an offence contrary to Section 78(a) of the Fisheries Act. Facts
 


The neutral citation for my Reasons for Judgment, which includes the full facts of the case, is 2022 BCPC 203. 
 


In brief, throughout 2018, Munro was the owner of the Wind Walker I, a vessel licenced to participate in British Columbia’s Salmon Area F Salmon Troll Fishery. Levesque was the skipper, also known as the vessel master, of the Wind Walker I. Both Munro and Levesque possessed valid fish harvester registration cards (“FRC”).
 


In 2018, the Wind Walker I had a salmon/troll licence with conditions of licence attached, allowing the Wind Walker I to retain a maximum of 0.4149 percent of the 2018 Area F Total Allowable Catch ("TAC") of Chinook salmon. In 2018, 0.4149 percent equalled 390 Chinook salmon.
 


The Wind Walker I had a valid salmon troll licence for the 2018 commercial fishing season, Salmon Troll Licence 2018 AT 3150 2018, issued on June 21, 2018, with an expiry date of March 31, 2019.
 


In 2018, there were 241 Chinook salmon troll licences for the Salmon Area F Salmon Troll Fishery. The total 2018 Area F TAC of Chinook salmon allocated to the commercial troll fishery was 93,900, meaning each of the commercial fishing troll licence holders were entitled to one of 241 shares, expressed in terms of a percentage. Thus, a maximum of 0.4149 percent of the total TAC. In 2018, 0.4149 percent equalled 390 Chinook salmon.
 


The Conditions of 2018/2019 Salmon Area F Licence, amended June 20, 2018, issued on June 21, 2018 (“Conditions of Licence”), set out the Wind Walker I’s TAC. Although a licence holder’s TAC cannot be carried from one year to the next, it is a common practice in British Columbia for licence holders in the commercial fishery to transfer a share of their TAC to another licence holder. Section 1. Species and quantities of fish permitted to be taken of the Conditions of Licence specifically allowed for such a practice. Munro and his company ATM Fishing Ltd. regularly participated in the practice.
 


Fisheries and Oceans Canada (“DFO”) is not involved in the licence holders’ negotiations or financial dealings concerning the decision to transfer a share. As such, the DFO is unaware of the terms agreed to by the parties. All that matters to the DFO is that a valid application to transfer a share is submitted to them. Upon receiving the valid application to transfer a share, the DFO processes the application and, upon approval, the DFO assigns a Chinook Quota Reallocation Confirmation Number certifying completion of the Chinook quota reallocation.
 


In the Wind Walker I’s case, the Conditions of Licence allowed the Wind Walker I to acquire a maximum total uncaught quota equal to three individual transferable quotas, which equates to 1.245 percent of the 2018 Area F TAC. In other words, 1,170 Chinook salmon. There was no evidence before the court that the Wind Walker I acquired a part or all of another fishing licence holder’s 2018 Area F TAC of Chinook salmon. Accordingly, the Wind Walker I’s Conditions of Licence only allowed for the catch and retention of 390 Chinook salmon in 2018.
 
 On July 22, 2018, 357 Chinook salmon caught in the commercial Salmon Area F Salmon Troll Fishery were offloaded from the Wind Walker I in Prince Rupert, British Columbia. As the Wind Walker I had a Chinook Current Vessel Remaining Chinook Quota (“VRQ”) of 390 Chinook salmon on July 22, 2018, the offloading of the 357 Chinook salmon left it with an Updated VRQ of 33 Chinook salmon.
 
 On August 8, 2018, 327 Chinook salmon caught in the commercial Salmon Area F Salmon Troll Fishery were offloaded from the Wind Walker I in Prince Rupert, British Columbia. As the Wind Walker I had a VRQ available of 33 Chinook salmon, the result was that it had offloaded 294 more Chinook salmon than allowed by its VRQ.
 
 During the course of the cross-examination of both Lenda Girard and Peter Katinic, defence counsel suggested to the witnesses that they knew or were told that Nick at 7 Seas often arranged for the sale or transfer of TACs from one licence holder to another. The line of questioning suggested that Nick at 7 Seas had dropped the ball and failed the defendants by not preparing and completing a valid transfer of another licence holder’s TAC to the Wind Walker I prior to August 8, 2018. All the same, regardless of who was responsible, the fact remained that the Wind Walker I did not receive all or part of another licence holder’s TAC. 
 
 Accordingly, on August 8, 2018, the maximum number of Chinook salmon that the Wind Walker I was allowed to fish for, sell or possess, was 33. Consequently, the Wind Walker I was 294 Chinook salmon over its quota limit, and therefore 294 Chinook salmon were illegally fished for, possessed, and sold.
 
 Fish Slips are created to record the value of fish sold by commercial fishers working in British Columbia. The DFO’s Fisheries Management Data Unit (“FMDU”) stores and maintains all Fish Slips records related to the landing of commercial fishing harvest in British Columbia. Fish Slips become a record of the landing of a fishing trip, and include information such as the vessel master’s name, vessel name, plant name, fishing date, lending date, area fished, trip length, type of gear used, species, weight, price, form, and value. FMDU uses the information in Fish Slips to create catch statistics. The Conditions of Licence required Fish Slips to be filled out and remitted by the vessel master to the FMDU not later than seven days after landing.
 
 Levesque, as the skipper of the Wind Walker I on July 22 and August 8, 2018, failed to remit the Fish Slips to the FMDU not later than seven days after landing Sentencing Positions of the Parties
 
 The PPSC seeks a punitive sentence for both defendants, emphasizing the principles of general and specific deterrence. Specifically, the PPSC relies upon several case authorities, including the leading British Columbia decisions of R. v. Brown, 2010 BCCA 225 and R. v. Schafhauser, 2017 BCSC 2287, and the recent Supreme Court of Canada decision in R. v. Vallieres, 2022 SCC 10.
 
 In Brown, a case that involved the harmful alteration, disruption or destruction of fish habitat contrary to the Fisheries Act, our Court of Appeal confirmed that the leading case on the principles of sentencing for environmental offences is R. v. Terroco Industries Limited, 2005 ABCA 141. In doing so, our Court of Appeal reinforced that sentencing principles for environmental offences require a unique approach, with specific emphasis on the areas of culpability, past involvement with the authorities, acceptance of responsibility, harm, and deterrence. 
 
 In Schafhauser, a summary conviction appeal case involving a commercial salmon fisher in Haida Gwaii, Justice Punnett confirmed that: 
 
The Fisheries Act is regulatory legislation designed to protect and preserve a valuable resource and any contravention of it must be taken seriously. Accordingly, the predominant sentencing consideration must be deterrence, both specifically of the accused and generally of other members of the public who are inclined to act in the same manner. Penalties must be sufficiently severe to communicate to the accused that there is a high risk associated with their illegal activities both for the resource they are affecting and to themselves for their conduct, (see R. v. Cox; NJ 264, NFLPC), R. v. Forsey, the latter at NJ. No. 264 (NLPC) at paragraph 20). 
 
In this instance, the sentencing judge appropriately highlighted the need for an appropriate sentence to deter similar conduct by the commercial fishing community generally and specifically by Mr. Schafhauser. I note that many of the authorities refer to the fact that a penalty should be more than simply a cost of doing business. In particular, in this instance, that is significant because this is a regulatory statute designed to preserve a valuable resource. In sentencing on regulatory offences, our Court of Appeal has accepted the following sentencing principles: culpability, prior record, acceptance of responsibility and remorse, the damage or harm done, and deterrence (see R. v. Terroco Industries Limited, 2005 ABCA 141 (CanLII), 2005 196 CCC (3d) 293, a decision of the Alberta Court of Appeal, pages 304 to 311; and R. v. Brown, 2010 BCCA 225, at paragraph 13).
 
 Counsel for the PPSC submits that the Court ought to impose the following penalties: i.


 Count 1: A $15,000 fine to each defendant. ii.


Count 3: A $5,000 fine to each defendant. iii.

 Count 4: A $3,000 fine to Levesque. iv.

 A commercial fishing licence suspension for each defendant. vi.

 A disgorgement penalty by way of a s. 79 Fisheries Act additional fine of $43,075.50, representing the gross value of the Chinook salmon from the August 8, 2015, trip, to be split between the defendants ($21,537.75 for each defendant). The PPSC views $43,075.50 as the amount of the monetary benefits received by the defendants as set out in the July 22 and August 8, 2015, Fish Slips. 
 

Counsel for the defendants vehemently disagrees with the PPSC's sentencing position and points to several mitigating factors: i.


 In relation to counts 1 and 3, this is not a case where Munro and Levesque went out and simply over-fished, as a great number of cases in the PPSC’s book of authorities are. This is a case in which Munro and Levesque went out and did what they thought was supposed to be done. They tried to follow the rules but did not use due diligence. Unfortunately, something broke down and the additional TAC quota was not transferred. Accordingly, the present case is properly characterized as more of a “record-keeping offence.” As such, the defendants do not deserve something akin to a fine that would be given to a thief, depriving the thief of his loot, so to speak. The defendants are not thieves. They didn’t take what was not theirs. They made efforts to secure the additional TAC quota. A third party – Nick at 7 Seas – failed to process the transaction. The defendants only error is that they failed to confirm, before fishing, that the additional TAC quota transfer had completed. ii.


Since the defendants had an honest, albeit mistaken, belief that the Wind Walker I had acquired an additional TAC adding 390 Chinook salmon to the Wind Walker I’s 2018 TAC, this is not an offence where fish were intentionally caught and then cover-ups happened after that. Nor is this a case where Chinook salmon were just intentionally caught over the quota. This was a case where the fishermen tried to do the right thing. They tried to play by the rules, and the result was not actual harm to the resource as no other party fished for, possessed or sold the 390 Chinook salmon that the defendants mistakenly believed had been transferred to the Wind Walker I. iii.

 In relation to count 4, as a first time skipper, it was a simple oversight on Levesque’s part and there was no malfeasance meant. In other words, it was a case of misfeasance, being an error by negligence or inadvertence. iv.

 When one looks at the bigger picture, the facts in context, the defendants do not have long, significant records showing a pattern of ungovernability. 
v.


While Munro has an enforcement history, he has 25 years in the fishing industry and has done well, considering that he has dyslexia, has suffered from thyroid cancer, and like many others involved in the commercial fishing industry, has suffered financially from the uncertainty that is endemic in Canada's commercial fishery. He is living with his parents and does not have significant financial assets to his name. vi.

 2018 was Levesque’s first year as a skipper. He was just starting out. He is only 30 years old. There is no pattern of misbehaviour. He was learning on the job and there have been no serious incidents since. Certainly, he has learned his lesson from the summer of 2018. He’s paid quite a price for it. vii.

 The defendants were not grossly negligent. 
viii.

It is not in the public interest to require the defendants to pay a disgorgement penalty by way of a s. 79 Fisheries Act additional penalty. ix.

 Applying the "totality principle" to the facts of the present case should result in a significantly small fine than the amount sought by the PPSC.
 
 In light of the mitigating factors present, the defendants seek a global fine of $3,000 for each defendant. 
Discussion
 
 Munro is an experienced commercial fisher and skipper. He is from a family of commercial fishers and is 38 years of age. He has a grade 9 education and has difficulty reading. Munro believes himself to have a learning disorder such as dyslexia. For the past two years, Munro has not been able to support himself financially and has had to rely upon his parents as he has been recovering from thyroid cancer. 
 
 For at least five years before the offences in this matter, Munro had been utilizing the services of Nick at 7 Seas to facilitate the purchase and transfer of other company's TAC's to allow Munro to lawfully fish for, possess and sell fish in excess of his initial TACs.
Culpability
 
 I believe Munro and Levesque share fifty/fifty the responsibility for the wrongdoing or failure in the present case. 
 
 Concerning counts 1 and 3, Munro and Levesque should have ensured -- before allowing the Wind Walker I to leave port on August 8, 2018 -- that the DFO had assigned a Chinook Quota Reallocation Confirmation Number certifying completion of the Chinook quota reallocation from Chinalibut. Likewise, Munro, as an experienced commercial fisher and skipper, should have ensured that Levesque was aware that he could not begin fishing before he had confirmation that the DFO had assigned a Chinook Quota Reallocation Confirmation Number certifying completion of the Chinook quota reallocation from Chinalibut.
 
 Concerning count 4, Munro, as an experienced commercial fisher and skipper, should have ensured that rookie skipper Levesque was aware that he needed to submit the Fish Slips as required by licence not later than seven (7) days after landing. That said, the ultimate responsibility lies with Levesque, who was the skipper on July 22 and August 8, 2018.
 
 Munro and Levesque should have had a system to track the completion of all tasks required by the Conditions of Licence. 
Prior Record
 
 Munro has a prior fishing record: June 26, 2015 – A warning for violating s. 26(1)(a) of the Fishing (General) Regulations. August 11, 2017 – A warning for violating s. 26(1)(a) of the Fishing (General) Regulations. August 18, 2017 -- A warning for violating s. 26(1)(a) of the Fishing (General) Regulations. February 4, 2019 -- Two convictions for violating s. 22(7) of the Fishing (General) Regulations on July 10, 2018, when he had barbed hooks and a non-functioning revival tank onboard the vessel.
 
 While Munro’s two convictions for violating s. 22(7) of the Fishing (General) Regulations relate to offences that predate the violations in the present case; the convictions were not entered until February 4, 2019. He was sentenced to a total of $2,500 in fines. Furthermore, while I am allowed to take notice of the three warnings issued to Munro before August 8, 2018, I must temper my knowledge of the warnings with the reality that warnings are subjective allegations untested in Court or otherwise subjected to judicial oversight.
 

Levesque has a prior fishing record, including two convictions for violating s. 22(7) of the Fishing (General) Regulations on August 4, 2017, which were disposed of in court on November 19, 2018. He received a total of $2,500 in fines. He also has one conviction for violating s. 25(1) of the Fisheries Act on October 18, 2018, which was disposed of in court on February 18, 2021, for which he received a $20,000 fine. I note that in relation to the s. 25(1) Fisheries Act conviction, Leveque was also ordered to pay an additional $25,000 penalty under s. 79.2(f) of the Fisheries Act, for the purpose of promoting the proper management and control of fisheries or fish habitat or the conservation and protection of fish or fish habitat. Acceptance of Responsibility and Remorse
 

Regarding counts 1 and 3, Munro and Levesque accept that they errored in failing to confirm that Chinalibut's TAC had been secured and the transfer approved by DFO before the Wind Walker I set out from port on August 8, 2018. At trial, the defendants pursued two technical and legalese defences, attacking legislative drafting that leaves room for improvement and raising an interesting and academically thought-provoking argument that s. 22(7) of the Fishery (General) Regulations is ultra vires and accordingly Munro and Levesque were entitled to acquittals on all counts. I do not doubt that Munro and Levesque genuinely wish they had not been negligent and, in the future, will ensure that the details of any anticipated TAC transfer are complete before taking to the water to fish. They accept that what they did was wrong. Likewise, concerning count 4, Levesque accepts that his failure to submit the Fish Slips is unacceptable.
 
 However, the defendants’ negligence in failing to confirm the completion of the transfer of Chinabut’s TAC and Levesque’s failure to submit the Fish Slips within seven days, are not mere administrative or accounting detail. The requirements were conditions of the fishing licence. 
 
 The failure to comply with the condition of licence and acquire the additional allowable TAC means that the 294 Chinook salmon fished for, possessed and sold on August 8, 2018, were illegally fished for, possessed and sold. 
 
 The failure to submit the Fish Slips was a flagrant breach of a fundamental licence condition. The data provided by the Fish Slips is crucial to the ability of DFO to manage the fisheries for the benefit of all Canadians properly. 
 
 The defendants knew what needed to be done. They did not do what needed to be done through either carelessness or laziness. It was no oversight or forgetfulness. They are required by law to know their responsibilities and complete their responsibilities. Accordingly, with respect, these are not merely record-keeping offences. Harm Done
 
 There is a saying in basketball, “no harm, no foul.” Defence counsel submits that the same principle should apply in the present case. Counsel seeks to discount the harm done by urging the Court to accept that there has been no foul in the present case. Counsel submits that the convictions in the present case are for what can be described as record-keeping offences. While it is true that concerning counts 1 and 3, Chinabut – the firm that was suppose to transfer its TAC -- did not fish for, possess or sell the excess 294 Chinook salmon; nonetheless, the integrity of the commercial fishing industry did take a hit. As regards count 4, I cannot overemphasize that accurate catch records, including Fish Slips, are a crucial indicator of the health of the commercial Chinook salmon fishery. The failure to provide the Fish Slips to DFO as required by a condition of licence has the possibility of affecting the setting of quota allocations to support sustainability. Fish Slips are created to record the value of fish sold by commercial fishers working in British Columbia. The FMDU stores and maintains all Fish Slips records related to the landing of commercial fishing harvest in British Columbia. Fish Slips become a record of the landing of a fishing trip, and include information such as the vessel master’s name, vessel name, plant name, fishing date, lending date, area fished, trip length, type of gear used, species, weight, price, form, and value. FMDU uses the information in Fish Slips to create catch statistics. 
 
 The DFO impact statement provided to the Court in R. v. Henneberry, 2019 NSSC 119, in paragraph 28, provides an excellent summary of the harm done in cases such as the present: Illegal retention of fish, misreporting, and failure to report catch have major consequences for the sustainability of fish stocks, the integrity of the management and monitoring systems, and the economics of the fishery. Ultimately, honest licence holders suffer negative financial consequences through lower quotas, more conservative by-catch limits, and higher costs of doing business. All Canadians pay higher management, enforcement, and legal costs for the damage done to a common property resource and to the marine ecosystem. It is also important to note that when licence holders have been successful at circumventing the rules and there are little consequences to their actions, other licence holders observe the outcomes. If illegal fishing practices go unchecked, the potential for other licence holders to advance in this direction increases, placing the stock and ecosystem at a higher risk. Additionally, misreporting impacts the processes used to establish catch limits and the management regime which ensures those limits are respected. Deterrence
 
 It has long been accepted that the paramount principle of sentencing in commercial fishing cases is specific and general deterrence. 
 
 The fines to be levied, combined with what has been a time-consuming and, no doubt, costly process for the defendants to engage in, will act to deter them specifically. 
 
 Nevertheless, general deterrence needs to be addressed. In considering general deterrence, I adopt the words of Judge Mrozinski as set out in the second half of paragraph 44 in R. v. McKinnell Fishing Ltd., 2016 BCPC 466: 
There may have been a time in the distant past when a mind of a practical bent might have wondered about the futility of the finer points of fisheries laws. 
In the present day, there is no room for such complacency. In a world in which resource sustainability is strained, not just by demand but by the environment itself, the value of regulatory compliance cannot be overstated. And at paragraph 46, Seen in this light, while the defendant's transgressions may, to, have seemed innocuous, they clearly are not. The failure to comply with its licence and regulations has the potential to contribute to a failure of this fishery, particularly if all fishers were of the same view. It is for this reason, clearly, that virtually all of the case law before me in this sentencing emphasizes the importance of the sentencing objectives of specific and general deterrence in regard to these regulatory offences.
 
 The sentence I impose must deter others engaged in the commercial fishing industry who fail to account for the minutiae of licensing conditions. The sentence must recognize that tedious paperwork cannot be forgotten or dismissed. Deadlines must be met, and DFO approval must be sought and gained when required by one’s licence conditions.
 
 When viewed in the context of the defendants in the present case, the sentence I am imposing will act as a deterrent to other commercial fishers. Conclusion
 
 In fashioning a sentence specific to Munro and Levesque, I have considered the Supreme Court of Canada's teachings in R. v. Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64, and the case law provided by counsel. I have also considered the moral blameworthiness of Munro and Levesque, which I find to be the middle of the scale for both defendants. I accept that Munro and Levesque did not set out to break the law. On the other hand: i.


 Munro did not undertake the actions required of a responsible commercial fishing vessel owner/operator to ensure that the DFO had assigned a Chinook Quota Reallocation Confirmation Number certifying completion of the Chinook quota reallocation from Chinalibut for the Wind Walker I before August 8, 2018; ii.


Levesque did not undertake the actions required of a responsible commercial fishing vessel skipper to ensure that the DFO had assigned a Chinook Quota Reallocation Confirmation Number certifying completion of the Chinook quota reallocation from Chinalibut; and iii.

 Levesque did not undertake the actions of a responsible skipper to ensure that the Fish Slips from the July 22, 2018, and August 8, 2018, fishing trips were submitted as required to the catch reporting service provider.
 
 In Lacasse, the Supreme Court of Canada instructed that the overarching principle is that a sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender, the latter of which means the offender's moral blameworthiness. The principle of parity, which requires a consideration of sentences imposed on similar offenders in similar circumstances, informs the proportionality analysis, ensuring that the sentence is both individually proportionate and proportionate with sentences given to other offenders in similar situations.
 
 That said, we are cautioned at paragraph 54 in Lacasse:
 
 The determination of whether a sentence is fit also requires that the sentencing objectives set out in s. 718 of the Criminal Code and the other sentencing principles set out in s. 718.2 be taken into account. Once again, however, it is up to the trial judge to properly weigh these various principles and objectives, whose relative importance will necessarily vary with the nature of the crime and the circumstances in which it was committed. The principle of parity of sentences . . . is secondary to the fundamental principle of proportionality. This Court explained this as follows in C.A.M.: It has been repeatedly stressed that there is no such thing as a uniform sentence for a particular crime. . . .Sentencing is an inherently individualized process, and the search for a single appropriate sentence for a similar offender and a similar crime will frequently be a fruitless exercise of academic abstraction.
 
 In paragraph 58 of Lacasse, concerning the applicability of sentencing ranges, the Court explained:
 
There will always be situations that call for a sentence outside a particular range: although ensuring parity in sentencing is in itself a desirable objective, the fact that each crime is committed in unique circumstances by an offender with a unique profile cannot be disregarded. The determination of a just and appropriate sentence is a highly individualized exercise that goes beyond a purely mathematical calculation. It involves a variety of factors that are difficult to define with precision. This is why it may happen that a sentence that, on its face, falls outside a particular range, and that may never have been imposed in the past for a similar crime, is not demonstrably unfit. Once again, everything depends on the gravity of the offence, the offender's degree of responsibility and the specific circumstances of each case. . .
 
 Based upon the lack of financial information provided by counsel about the defendants, I cannot say if the fines requested by either counsel are appropriate for these two defendants. 
 
 Unlike in a Family Court matter, where parties are routinely required to file a Financial Statement that sets out their savings plus income and expenses for at least three, if not more, years, I do not know in the present case if the defendants are destitute or flush with cash. 
 
 Defence counsel has told the Court that Munro has been battling thyroid cancer and had to rely upon his parents financially over the past two years, but does this mean that Munro is broke or has no prospects in 2023 and forward to earn a significant income? And I do not know the financial situation of Levesque. Although Levesque is early in his fishing career, he might be financially secure. I do not know.
 
 I am cognizant that $44,537.75 in fines for a person who makes $200,000 a year in income is not the same as $44,537.75 in fines for a person earning British Columbia's minimum wage of $15.65 per hour. 
 
 Section 734(2) of the Criminal Code, which applies to all Acts of Parliament, including the Fisheries Act, makes it clear that when determining the appropriate fine amounts to be handed out in the present case, I cannot blindly pick dollar figures out of the air. I must consider the defendants’ ability to pay the fine. Section 734(2) reads, Offender’s ability to pay (2) Except when the punishment for an offence includes a minimum fine or a fine is imposed in lieu of a forfeiture order, a court may fine an offender under this section only if the court is satisfied that the offender is able to pay the fine or discharge it under section 736.
 

Without a better understanding of each defendant's current financial position, it is difficult for the Court to craft fines that act as both specific deterrence for the defendants and general deterrence for other commercial fishers and companies involved in the commercial fishing industry. Given what counsel submitted on behalf of the defendants regarding their current financial situation, I am not satisfied that the defendants can pay the fine amounts requested by the PPSC, even if I give the defendants many years to pay the files. 
 
 In considering the PPSC's request for a s. 79 Fisheries Act additional penalty, I agree that an additional penalty is appropriate in this case. While the defendants did not set out to break the law, their negligence and lack of due diligence allowed them to financially benefit from the Chinook salmon that were caught, possessed and sold to 7 Seas on August 8, 2018. Based on the Fish Slips, the monetary benefit received by the defendants is $43,075.50. As I previously determined, the responsibility for the wrongdoing or failure in the present case is shared fifty/fifty between Munro and Levesque. Accordingly, the s. 79 Fisheries Act additional penalty will be split evenly between the defendants: $21,537.75 to Munro and $21,537.75 to Levesque. If the defendants believe that one of them should be paying more than a 50% share of the disgorgement penalty, they can work that out between themselves. 
 
 Given: 
1.


my earlier determination that the combination of the fines I impose today with the costs and time spent by the defendants in participating in the Court process will specifically deter the defendants, and 
2.


the disgorgement penalty; 
I decline the PPSC’s request to suspend the commercial fishing licences of either Munro or Levesque -- both of whom I am treating as first time offenders for purposes of this sentencing -- for all or part of 2023. 
Sentences Imposed
 
 In respect of Munro, the sentence imposed is as follows: Count 1: $2,500. The time to pay will be December 31, 2026. Count 3: $1,000. The time to pay will be December 31, 2026. Section 79 Fisheries Act additional penalty of $21,537.75. The time to pay will be December 31, 2028.
 
 In respect of Levesque, the sentence imposed is as follows: Count 1: $2,500. The time to pay will be December 31, 2026. Count 3: $1,000. The time to pay will be December 31, 2026. Count 4: $5,000. The time to pay will be December 31, 2026. Section 79 Fisheries Act additional fine of $21,537.75. The time to pay will be December 31, 2028.
 
 All of which is ordered this 6th day of January, 2023.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/pc/2023bcpc14.html
 


Ryan Patrick pled guilty to two counts of possessing drugs for the purpose of trafficking and one count of possessing a weapon for a purpose dangerous to the public peace. Counsel agree that a custodial sentence is appropriate; however, they diverge on the appropriate length. The task for this court is to identify a fit sentence. CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE OFFENCE
 


On December 17, 2018, the Vancouver Police executed a search warrant at a single room occupancy building on Richards Street in Vancouver and they recovered the following: •

 
A clear plastic bag containing 49.89 grams of cocaine; •

 
A jar containing 15.28 grams of methamphetamine; •

 
A plastic bag containing 14.04 grams of methamphetamine; •

 
A plastic bag containing 3.75 grams of fentanyl, methamphetamine, Etizolam; •

 
A modified pop tin containing 5.77 grams of fentanyl and methamphetamine; 
•

 
An imitation 9 mm handgun; •

 
Bear spray; •

 
A baton; and •

 
Two scales, hundreds of small zip lock baggies, a grinder and cutting agents. MR. PATRICK’S PERSONAL CIRCUMSTANCES
 


Mr. Patrick is 32 years old. He was born in Ontario and raised by a single mother who married when he was four years old. Mr. Patrick has the support of his mother and stepfather, who live in Ontario. Mr. Patrick has no contact with his biological father and limited contact with his stepbrothers.
 


Growing up, Mr. Patrick had difficulty in school and by the time he was in his teens he had frequent contact with the justice system for offences including; robbery, dangerous driving, assault with a weapon and theft. Mr. Patrick attributes his criminal behavior to drug use, negative peers, a lack of concern for self and others, and poor problem solving skills.
 


According to Mr. Patrick’s mother, she became overwhelmed in trying to manage him as a teenager, therefore, and with the intention of helping him receive more support, she surrendered him and he was placed into foster care. While in care, Mr. Patrick attended various programs including “Hats Off – Residential Treatment Centre”.
 


Despite being in care, Mr. Patrick was regularly involved with the justice system. Unfortunately, this pattern continued into adulthood when he accumulated convictions for; aggravated assault, assault, possession of a weapon, robbery, and drug possession. His last conviction was in 2013.
 


In terms of mental health, it was noted in the psychological assessment that Mr. Patrick had been diagnosed with ADHD and that he suffered abuse between the ages of three to nine years. It is Mr. Patrick’s view that the abuse made him defiant and contributed to his anti-social behaviour.
 


As for work and education, Mr. Patrick completed grade 12 when he was 19. He has worked as a skilled labourer and he is an experienced carpenter’s helper and roofer. He changed jobs frequently and he acknowledges his substance abuse interfered with his ability to work and as his use increased he would resort to illegal activity as a means to raise funds. 
 


When asked about his offences, Mr. Patrick commented he was living in a building “full of addicts” where overdoses were a common occurrence. Now, and with the clarity of sobriety, Mr. Patrick recognizes his actions were wrong and he believes his addiction, corresponding street entrenchment and connection to the drug culture prevented him from recognizing the wrongfulness of his actions. Notably, Mr. Patrick did not express concern to the writer of the Pre-Sentence Report for the harm he may have caused those who purchased drugs from him.
 
 Mr. Patrick’s Pre-Sentence Report and the psychological assessment confirms his substance misuse is the primary driver to his criminal conduct. Mr. Patrick started using marijuana when he was 14 and by 22, he was using cocaine regularly. Then, and after moving to Vancouver, he started using heroin. Thereafter, he progressed to using heroin every day for six years. According to Mr. Patrick, he was a functioning addict and his family and friends had no idea that he was using. 
 
 To Mr. Patrick’s credit, he has pursued sobriety on several occasions. He has attended various detox centres, he has sought help from his family, he has tried methadone, and he is currently taking Suboxone. Although, Mr. Patrick has not taken any programs while in custody, he remains committed to achieving his sobriety the primary reason for this is he appreciates that sobriety is critical to him accessing his children. 
 
 Although, some may be suspicious of Mr. Patrick’s claim of being committed to his sobriety, I accept his statement because, his hope for sobriety is evidenced by his previous attempts; moreover, sobriety is necessary before he can see his children; and finally, the Personality Assessment Inventory suggests Mr. Patrick is interested in and motivated for treatment.
 
 According to the psychological assessment, Mr. Patrick is not suffering from any major mental illness. He has an opioid use disorder and a stimulant use disorder. Dr. Kropp, the author of the psychological assessment, opines that Mr. Patrick is vulnerable to relapse if he returns to a high-risk environment or if he is in a relationship with an active drug user.
 
 Turning to Mr. Patrick’s social network, Mr. Patrick was in a long-term relationship with Ms. Sloan, his co-accused, and she has long-standing substance use challenges. Together, they have a daughter and Mr. Patrick has been a father to Ms. Sloan’s young son. While in custody, Mr. Patrick has had phone and video contact with the children. Once out of custody, Mr. Patrick hopes to reunite with his children. The Ministry will consider access provided Mr. Patrick shows a significant period of stability, sobriety, and cooperation with the Ministry. 
 
 In terms of future plans, Mr. Patrick wants to obtain his welding certification and work as a welder. Also, and because access to his children depends on it, Mr. Patrick is prepared to address his challenges by engaging with medical supports including counselling and treatment. In fact, while in custody, Mr. Patrick has been engaging with the health team and he is trying medication intended to assist with his ADHD. He has also put in a request to connect with a team of nurses, doctors, and psychologists in order to obtain assistance with his mental health and addiction challenges. Then, and once stabilized, Mr. Patrick plans to move with his children to Ontario so he can be closer to family supports. 
 
 It is noted that Mr. Patrick performs best when he is supported. In this regard, with the help of his mother, he returned to Ontario for a period, he entered treatment, he maintained sobriety for approximately 15 months, and he enrolled in a school program. This observation aligns with Dr. Kropp’s recommendations of; continued opioid agonist treatment, access to residential treatment and continued psychological treatment or counselling. Lastly, Dr. Kropp notes Mr. Patrick’s success will be dependant on his motivation to avoid high-risk environments and other drug-using or antisocial associates. 
POSITION OF THE PARTIES
 
 The Crown submits a global sentence of three years less time served is appropriate, and breaks down the sentences in the following manner: Count 1, fentanyl, three years; Count 2, cocaine, 1½ years; and Count 4, weapons, six months, with all sentences served concurrently. The Crown argues the location, the nature of the drugs and the quantities justifies a three-year sentence. The Crown relies on R. v. Parranto, 2021 SCC 46, R. v. Smith, 2017 BCCA 112, R. v. Mann, 2018 BCCA 265, R. v. D’Allesandro, 2019 BCSC 1810, and R. v. Lockhart, 2021 BCSC 1226.
 
 Counsel for Mr. Patrick argues a global sentence of 20 months less time served is appropriate, and he breaks down the sentences in the following manner; 20 months for the fentanyl count, 12 months for cocaine count and four months for the weapons’ count, with all sentences served concurrently. In support, counsel points to Mr. Patrick’s personal circumstances including his ADHD, his previous trauma and his addiction. SENTENCING PRINCIPLES Introduction
 
 In R. v. Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64 at para. 1, the Supreme Court of Canada observed, “…sentencing is one of the most delicate stages of the criminal justice process in Canada.” The Court then went on to note that sentencing is more of an art than a science, involving the balancing of multiple factors including the objectives and principles as set out in the Criminal Code: at para. 1. Notably, the ultimate goal of sentencing is a fair, fit and principled sanction: R. v. Parranto, 2021 SCC 46 at para. 10.
Purpose and principles of sentencing
 
 Sections 718 – 718.2 of the Criminal Code sets out factors that a judge must consider when identifying a fit sentence. Guidance is also found in section 10 of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, where the purpose of sentencing and factors that shall be considered when imposing a sentence related to drug offences are set out. Specifically, the section indicates the purpose of any sentence imposed is to protect society and contribute to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just peaceful and safe society and for offences involving drugs, it includes encouraging rehabilitation and treatment in appropriate circumstances. 
 
 Further to the above, it must be recognized that proportionality is a fundamental principle of sentencing. Simply, the sentence imposed must be proportionate to the serious of the offence and the degree of offender responsibility. In Lacasse, the Court commented on how proportionality is determined: Proportionality is determined both on an individual basis, that is, in relation to the accused him or herself and to the offence committed by the accused, and by comparison with sentences imposed for similar offences committed in similar circumstances.
 
 Further relevant sentencing principles that must be considered include; adjustments for the aggravating and mitigating factors, other similar sentencing decisions, and the principle of restraint. 
APPLICATION
 
 Drug trafficking offences requires a sentence that denounces and deters. Simply, the sentence imposed must communicate society’s abhorrence for Mr. Patrick having breached societal rules. The sentence must also inform those who sell or possess drugs for the purpose of trafficking, that they will be dealt with harshly and absent significantly reduced culpability, a jail sentence will likely follow: R. v. Voong, 2015 BCCA 285.
 
 Despite the importance of denunciation and deterrence, I am mindful of Mr. Patrick’s rehabilitative prospects. On the one hand, he has a long standing, deeply entrenched addiction to opioids, on the other hand, he is motivated, he has family support, and he has previously obtained periods of sobriety. 
 
 Turning to the issue of proportionality. The seriousness of Mr. Patrick’s offences cannot be overstated. On this point, the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Parranto, 2021 SCC 46 at para. 87 commented: The dangers posed by trafficking in hard drugs, such as heroin and cocaine, have long been recognized in Canada. Over the past few decades, however, society’s awareness of the true gravity of trafficking in such drugs has grown to the point that we are reminded, on a daily basis, of the death, destruction, and havoc it causes in communities across Canada.
 
 Further to the above, the social and personal harm caused by fentanyl is staggering. Thousands have died and many more have become disabled. Fentanyl has overburdened emergency responders and health care professionals in that on a daily basis if not hourly, they assist a multitude of persons in the throes of overdosing on fentanyl.
 
 As for Mr. Patrick’s moral culpability, I note he had the wherewithal to acquire the drugs, conceal them and engage in their distribution, this suggests a heightened degree of culpability. Despite this, Mr. Patrick’s individual circumstances serve to slightly reduce his culpability. In this regard, I find his childhood trauma likely contributed to his drug use, he was significantly addicted at the time of his offence, and he was selling to sustain his addiction. 
 
 As for the aggravating and mitigating factors, it is aggravating that Mr. Patrick possessed Schedule 1 drugs for the purpose of trafficking. Specifically, the drugs involved were addictive and deadly. The quantities involved and the presence of weapons is also aggravating. Lastly, I find the environment where Mr. Patrick’s offences occurred to be aggravating. In this regard, his offences occurred in a SRO (single room occupancy building) where some of society’s most vulnerable live. On this point, I am guided by Parranto, where the Court stated at para. 70: While not raised by the parties or the court below, this appeal provides an opportunity to emphasize that, when assessing the gravity of the offence, it is open to both the sentencing judge and the Court of Appeal to take into account the offender’s willingness to exploit at‑risk populations and communities. In this regard, choices which demonstrate a reckless disregard for human life increase not only the gravity of the offence but the moral culpability of the offender and may amount to an aggravating factor in sentencing.
 
 Turning to the mitigating factors, Mr. Patrick’s guilty plea is mitigating. The plea has saved court time and it has avoided taking front line officers off of the streets in order to testify. The plea is also an acknowledgment of wrongdoing and it displays some remorse. Finally, Mr. Patrick’s preparedness to give a statement to the authorities, coupled with his family support, is mitigating. 
 
 I have considered the relevant sentencing authorities. In doing so, I appreciate sentencing is an individualized exercise where the unique circumstances of the offender is highly relevant. Despite this, the authorities are of assistance and in this regard, I acknowledge the range for fentanyl offences starts at 18 months and possibly exceeding 36 months, especially were the offender has a related record or has demonstrated an indifference to the lives of persons he has put at risk: R. v. Smith, 2017 BCCA 112 at para. 45. 
 
 In D'Allesandro, the offender was convicted after a trial and he received a four-year sentence for possessing heroin and fentanyl for the purpose of trafficking and 18 months concurrent for possessing cocaine and methamphetamine for the purpose of trafficking. The offender was charged after the police executed a warrant at his residence, which was in a building for vulnerable persons. In the residence, the police located 21.7 grams of heroin/fentanyl mix, 5.83 grams of methamphetamine, and 9.71 grams of cocaine. Also located was approximately $25,000. The offender was 40, he had a long-standing drug addiction and he had a lengthy criminal record with three previous convictions for possession for the purpose of trafficking.
 
 In Lockhart, the offender was convicted after trial of two counts of trafficking; fentanyl and a fentanyl/heroin mix, and he received concurrent 26-month sentences. The offender was charged after making two drug sales in a location well known for drug trafficking. Each sale was for $20, he lacked sophistication and according to the sentencing judge, he targeted the disenfranchised. The offender was 39, unemployed and at the time of the offence, he was addicted to heroin; however, at the time of sentencing, the offender had been sober for 11 months. The offender had a criminal record with 14 convictions including possession for the purpose of trafficking. DECISION 
 
 The sentence I impose must denounce and deter, and per Smith, I conclude the appropriate range is between 18 months and beyond 36 months. In considering the authorities provided, I recognize Mr. Patrick pled guilty, and unlike D'Allesandro, there is no evidence that he was amassing a significant amount of cash, nor, does Mr. Patrick have previous trafficking related convictions. I also note, Mr. Patrick’s operation was slightly above street level and it lacked sophistication. I find the presence of weapons and the context wherein he committed his offences to be concerning. Nevertheless and to Mr. Patrick’s credit, he pled guilty, he has family support and he cooperated with the authorities. 
 
 With the above in mind, I impose the following concurrent custodial sentences: •

 
Count 1, Fentanyl – 24 months •

 
Count 2, Cocaine – 18 months •

 
Count 4, Weapons – 6 months
 
 In terms of pre-sentence time in custody, Mr. Patrick will be credited with 521 days and adjusted he is credited with 17 months, 2 weeks. Accordingly, he has a balance of 6 months, 2 weeks left to serve and in order for him to remain close to his supports and away from the downtown eastside, it is the recommendation of this Court that he serve his sentence at Prince George Regional Correctional sentence. 
 
 Finally, and with respect to the sentences impose, I declined to accede to the Crown’s submission of a 36-month sentence because I do not see Mr. Patrick’s conduct as falling at the higher end of the range. Simply, he has reduced culpability, he was drug addicted, his offending lacked sophistication, he was trafficking to feed his addiction, he was operating at just above street level and he pled guilty to the offences. 
 
 As for defence counsel’s suggestion of 20 months, I am of a view that such a sentence would not be proportional to the seriousness of the offences. This is because of the quantities, the nature of the drugs, the presence of weapons and the area where the offences occurred. ANCILLORY ORDERS DNA
 

Pursuant to s. 487.051 of the Criminal Code, I order that Mr. Patrick provide a sample of his DNA. Weapons prohibition
 
 Pursuant to s. 109 of the Criminal Code, Mr. Patrick is prohibited from possessing firearms and all other items in that section for life. Victim fine surcharge
 
 Mr. Patrick has been unemployed and in custody for a lengthy period of time. As such, to impose a victim fine surcharge would be a hardship on Mr. Patrick and it is therefore waived.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/pc/2023bcpc3.html
 


Before me today for sentencing is Darcy Dean Anderson.
 


He has plead guilty to one count of unlawful possession of methamphetamine for the purpose of trafficking, contrary to s. 5(2) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (“CDSA”) and to a second count of unlawful possession of fentanyl and cocaine for the purpose of trafficking. The offences occurred on June 11, 2021 in Kamloops, British Columbia. Circumstances of the Offence
 


On June 11, 2021, police were conducting foot patrols in the North Shore of Kamloops. At approximately 16:55 hours, police observed four individuals behind a gas station sharing an open flame and pop can. Mr. Anderson was one of the individuals. At the time of the offence, officers learned that Mr. Anderson was subject to house arrest having being released by a Release Order the day prior. A search of Mr. Anderson revealed $140 in cash, a scale, 27.4 grams of meth, 11.1 grams of mixed cocaine and fentanyl of which analysis determined contained approximately 2.5% fentanyl, and 10.8 grams of cocaine. A conservative estimate of the value of the drugs found on Mr. Anderson was approximately $2,470. 
Circumstances of Offender 
 


Mr. Anderson is 34 years of age and identifies as Indigenous. From a Gladue Report prepared for Mr. Anderson on a prior matter and submitted by his counsel in this proceeding, it is clear that Mr. Anderson has significant Gladue factors. The report states that Mr. Anderson's grandmother was from the Montreal Lake Cree Nation. She was removed as a child as part of the Sixties Scoop, that she had also spent time at a residential school. She was kept away from her family and community during this time. As Mr. Anderson’s maternal aunt states “as her mother got older, she wouldn’t say any thing about her past or let any of us kids be alone with a priest or go into a church. There was just so much unaddressed trauma.” At 18 years of age, she moved to 100 Mile House, British Columbia, with a new partner. Together they had seven children and there was a lot of violence and alcoholism in the relationship. 
 


One of Mr. Anderson's maternal aunts was run over and left on the side of the road to die at the age of 15. No one stopped to see if she was okay and there were no arrests made. 
 


Bonnie, is the mother of Darcy Anderson. She passed away at the age of 47 years with cirrhosis of the liver – she drank herself to death. Mr. Anderson’s maternal aunt recalls “Bonnie got pregnant with her first child when she was 15 years old and even though it was a violent and unhealthy relationship, she remained involved with Jake off and on for a few years after. When she became pregnant with Darcy, they were no longer together. However, he continued to stalk and harass her. One night – and this was while she was pregnant with Darcy – he snuck into our house in the middle of the night, crept into Bonny’s bedroom, and tried to stab her in the belly with a coat hanger.” He was arrested, however, the family did not know what became of it. Jake left the area and the family did not see him again. They later learned that he had died of an overdose. Mr. Anderson was apprehended at three years of age and between the ages of 13 and 17, transitioned through a number of non-Indigenous foster homes.
 


One of his foster parents, Ms. Bjornson stated that Darcy was 14 years old when he and his brother were placed by the Ministry in her care. She recalled: 
At the time, Darcy was living with his brother Darryl in an apartment in100 Mile. Another young guy, who was approximately 19 years old was also living with them – he committed suicide by shooting himself in the head with a shotgun in front of the boys. It was somehow drug related and when I was contacted by the social workers, I found Darcy and Darryl hiding out in this space they’d made under a staircase at the apartment building because they were too frightened to go back inside. 
 


At age 15, Mr. Anderson was diagnosed with Fetal Alcohol Syndrome Disorder (FASD). At age 18, it was also determined that Darcy suffered from Attention Deficit Hyperactive Disorder and complex Post Traumatic Stress Disorder. In relation to FASD, the PSR writer states that: “The adult who is affected by fetal alcohol exposure struggles with impulsive and unpredictable behaviour. They often develop unhealthy friendships because they are susceptible to peer pressure and develop secondary disabilities in drug and alcohol use. As they are unable to predict by nature the consequences of their actions, individuals diagnosed with FASD have processing deficits often compounded by slower than normal processing speeds.” 
 


At 19, Mr. Anderson left foster care then became involved with criminal activity in the 100 Mile House area. From the comments of former foster parent, Ms. Bjornson, as set out in the Gladue report, the police were “uneducated around the fetal alcohol syndrome disorder and misconstrued many of his quirks.” She found that Mr. Anderson would struggle with bail and probation conditions and “so began the slippery slope of his being involved with the criminal justice system.” She observed that with charges, the lead would be stayed, but Mr. Anderson would be incarcerated for the breaches.
 
 In Kamloops, Mr. Anderson is leading the life of an addict. He has been homeless for some time. His addictions are alcohol and crystal meth. He associates with individuals that suffer from drug addiction and similar living situations. 
 
 Up until very recently, Mr. Anderson had very little knowledge or connection with his Indigenous background and his family. 
 
 The colonial history in this country has had a significant impact on the lives of Mr. Anderson and at least two generations of his family. This has resulted in generational trauma, which finds its place before me in this sentencing. Sentencing Positions 
 
 The Crown’s positon on sentence is 18 months’ jail. This position is informed by recent case law, s. 718(2)(e) of the Criminal Code, and an acknowledged reduced moral culpability for Mr. Anderson, given his struggles with FASD and the significant Gladue factors present in his life. But for the reduced moral culpability of Mr. Anderson, the Crown submits an appropriate range of sentence is 24 to 36 months. 
 
 The Defence submits that an appropriate sentence is 6 to 12 months’ jail to be served by a Conditional Sentence Order. I will note that although defence counsel submits 6 months as the lower range, no authority was provided in support of that position. In any event, a 6 month sentence for possession for the purpose of trafficking of fentanyl does not and will not address the principle of proportionality nor will it address the specific principles denunciation and deterrence, given the gravity of the offence and the role that fentanyl has played in the death of so many people. Accordingly, I will say at the outset, 6 months’ jail is simply not appropriate in the circumstances. 
 
 Before I engage in a review of case law, it is important to provide context to the fentanyl crisis in this province. Counsel for the Crown has provided to this court two reports. The first is a report from Dr. Kennedy describing fentanyl uses, abuse and toxicity. The second is a recent report prepared by the British Columbia Coroner’s office regarding illicit drug toxicity deaths in British Columbia for the period January 1, 2012 to August 31, 2022. Reports on fentanyl and illicit drug deaths in British Columbia 
 
 From the report of Dr. James R. Kennedy: July 25, 2016 letter to Public Prosecution Services of Canada re: Fentanyl Uses, Abuse and Toxicity: 
•

 
Fentanyl is a potent synthetic opioid drug and is 100 times more potent than morphine. By comparison, heroin is about two times as potent as morphine and cocaine is one-tenth the potency of morphine. 
•

 
The mechanism by which fentanyl causes death is almost always related to respiratory depression resulting in lethally low circulating oxygen levels (hypoxemia). Sometimes the respiratory depression and resulting hypoxia is enough to cause permanent and devastating brain damage but not death. The overdose is most often related to intravenous use, snorting or inhalation through smoking. •

 
Fentanyl has similar addictive potentiality as morphine, heroin and oxycodone. This means that the user continues to use the drug in spite of awareness of the harm it is doing to himself or herself (respiratory depression and death). Users who know they are taking fentanyl often accept this dangerous risk. 
 
 From the report of the British Columbia Coroners Service “Illicit Drug Toxicity Deaths in BC for period January 1, 2012 to August 31, 2022” posted, September 28, 2022: •

 
In 2012 there were 186 illicit drug toxicity deaths in the province of BC. In 2022, this number increased to 1,468. 
•

 
For the period 2019 – 2022, fentanyl was involved in 85.8% of illicit drug toxicity deaths. 
•

 
The majority of illicit drug toxicity deaths occurred during the days following income assistance. 
•

 
For the Interior Health Region (Kamloops and surrounding area), in 2012, there were 31 illicit drug toxicity deaths. For the period January 2021 to August 2022, there were 625 illicit drug toxicity deaths in the IHA. 
•

 
Compared to other common causes of unnatural deaths from 2011 to 2021, illicit drug deaths are five time higher than deaths by suicide, MVA, homicide or prescription drugs. (p 4, figure 2)
 
 
 The truly sad part of these statistics is the loss of human life. The deceased were someone’s son, daughter, grandchild, parent and even grandparent. So many people have been left grieving the loss of their loved ones and haunted by the fact that their loved one died under the influence of fentanyl. 
Sentencing Range
 
 In R. v. Smith, 2017 BCCA 112 (CanLII), 2017 B.C.C.A. 112, Mr. Smith plead guilty to one count of possession of cocaine and one count of fentanyl, both for the purposes of trafficking . He was found in possession of 13 flaps of fentanyl (approximately 2.6 grams in total), 18 flaps of powdered cocaine (approximately 4.2 grams) and several rocks of crack cocaine weighing 3.2 grams in total. Mr. Smith is Indigenous and at the time of the offence was 59 years old and a first time offender. Our Court of Appeal agreed with many judges who have determined that denunciation and deterrence must be given primacy in cases involving fentanyl and in doing so, concluded that the normal range begins at 18 months’ imprisonment with a suggested upper range of 36 months, where the offender has a substantial record involving the sale of fentanyl or otherwise demonstrates an indifference to the human lives he or she is putting at risk.
 
 In R. v. Tom, 2018 BCPC 87 (CanLII), 2018 B.C.P.C. 87, Mr. Tom plead guilty to a charge of possession of fentanyl for the purpose of trafficking. He received a sentence of 18 months less time served. While there were significant Gladue factors present in Mr. Tom’s life, the court did not find exceptional circumstances. The court found Mr. Tom’s desire to seek help with his addiction and desire to pursue a path to rehabilitation was a particularly mitigating factor and the presence of fentanyl an aggravating factor. 
 
 In R. v. Brown, 2019 BCPC 313 (CanLII), 2019 B.C.P.C. 313, Mr. Brown was sentenced to 30 months’ jail for possession for purposes of trafficking of seven grams of fentanyl and cocaine. Mr. Brown is Indigenous and was 26 years of age at sentencing. Significant Gladue factors were present in Mr. Brown’s life. At the time of sentencing, Mr. Brown was not drug dependant. In regards to Mr. Brown’s moral culpability, the court had this to say at para 25: 
25 As for Mr. Brown's degree of moral culpability, he was not drug dependant at the time of his offence and it appears that he was selling drugs to maintain his lifestyle of "partying". At first blush, it may appear that Mr. Brown has a high degree of moral culpability; however, such a conclusion ignores Mr. Brown's Indigenous background and the impact of colonialism. In this regard, Mr. Brown, his family, and his community, have suffered substance abuse, violence, low level of education, poverty, and disconnection from; culture, tradition, role models, and community. For these reasons, I conclude that Mr. Brown's level of moral culpability is toward the low end of the spectrum.
 
 The court found Mr. Brown’s criminal record and the fact that Mr. Brown was on probation at the time of his offence as particularly aggravating factors. In arriving at sentence the court noted at para 32: 
32 …I note the impact that colonialism has had on Mr. Brown. In fact, a review of his background and history strongly suggests that he was doomed to face significant struggles even before his birth. Specifically, the historical mistreatment of Indigenous persons placed Mr. Brown on the roadway to criminal involvement and even gave him a push.
 
 After considering all materials and submissions of counsel, the court had this to say at paragraph 34: 
34 …A sentence of three to four years, although likely appropriate were it not for Mr. Brown's Indigenous heritage, however the length disregards the importance of minimizing Mr. Brown's separation from his family and his Reserve. As such, a lesser period of custody is warranted but it must be one that still denounces and deters.
 
 Mr Brown was sentenced to 30 months’ jail. 
 
 In R. v. Lockhart, 2021 BCSC 1226 (CanLII), 2021 B.C.S.C. 1226, Following a three day trial, Mr. Lockhart was convicted of two counts of trafficking in illicit drugs – heroin and fentanyl. The amount of drugs was two points sold for $20 each to an undercover officer. He was sentenced to 26 months’ jail. Mr. Lockhart is Indigenous and was 39 years old at time of sentencing. He suffered from an opioid addiction and was living on the street selling drugs to support his addiction. Prior to sentencing, he was clean and sober for 11 months and took steps to remove himself from drug culture. He had a related criminal record with a gap. In terms of Mr. Lockhart’s background, at para. 13, the court found that : 13 Mr. Lockhart was born into a First Nations community near Regina, Saskatchewan. His grandparents were part of the residential school system. His parents were not. As a child, he was introduced to and participated in traditional Indigenous gatherings, dances, and other cultural events. His upbringing was not chaotic. His family was not dysfunctional. His childhood was relatively normal.
 
 No reports were provided to the court at sentencing. Instead, counsel for Mr. Lockhart made submissions on Mr. Lockhart’s background. At the end of the day, the court did not find exceptional circumstances that would take the case out of the normal range. As well, the court did not find any reduced moral culpability on the part of Mr. Lockhart. In passing sentence, the court placed significant weight on the seriousness of offence of trafficking in Fentanyl. 
 
 
In R. v. McDonald, 2018 BCPC 244 (CanLII), 2018 B.C.P.C. 244, Mr. McDonald entered guilty pleas to possession of fentanyl for the purpose of trafficking and possession of cocaine for the purpose of trafficking. He also plead guilty to unauthorized possession of a firearm. With respect to the fentanyl offence, the Crown sought a sentence of three years. Defence submitted that 10 to12 months’ jail is warranted based on Mr. McDonald’s young age, the Gladue factors present in his life and specifically, his FASD diagnosis, which collectively amounted to exceptional circumstances justifying a deviation from the usual range. The court found that if Mr. McDonald was a usual offender without the cognitive deficits associated with his FASD the appropriate sentence in the circumstances, would have been 24 months for the charge of possessing fentanyl for the purpose of trafficking. The court concluded that given Mr. McDonald’s significantly reduced personal responsibility due to his serious diagnosed cognitive disabilities, a substantial reduction from what the sentence for an otherwise average offender in the circumstances would have been was warranted and sentenced Mr. McDonald to 12 months’ jail on the fentanyl offence. 
Sentencing Principles 
a.
 Fundamental Principle (s. 718.1): A sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender. b.
 Purpose: Denounce unlawful conduct and the harm done to victims; to deter the offender and other persons from committing offences; to separate offenders from society where necessary; to assist in rehabilitating offenders; to provide reparations for harm done to victims or to the community; to promote a sense of responsibility in offenders, and acknowledgement of the harm done to victims or to the community. c.
 A sentence should be increased or reduced to account for any relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances related to the offence for the offender. d 
In accordance with 718.2(e) of the Criminal Code and the Supreme Court of Canada decisions of R. v. Gladue 1999 CanLII 679 (SCC), [1999] 1 SCR 688 and R. v. Ipeelee, 2012 SCC 13 (CanLII), [2012] 1 S.C.R. 433, all available sanctions other than imprisonment that are reasonable in the circumstances and consistent with the harm done to victims or to the community should be considered for all offenders, with particular attention to the circumstances of aboriginal offenders. A judge must consider the unique systemic or background factors that may have played a part in bringing the offender before the court and the types of sentencing procedures and sanctions that may be appropriate in the circumstances because of the offender’s heritage or connection. This principle should not be taken as a means of automatic reducing the prison sentence of aboriginal offenders. Sentence imposed will depend on all the factors that must be taken into account in each individual case. Aggravating factors
 
 Mr. Anderson possessed meth, cocaine and fentanyl for the purpose of trafficking. Fentanyl is a deadly drug and has taken the lives of many and for that reason, courts place a significant amount of weight on deterrence and denunciation. 
 
 At the time of the offence, Mr. Anderson was subject to a Release Order with house arrest and was on probation for other matters. 
 
 Mr. Anderson has a criminal record with convictions for assault, ACBH, breaches of court orders, several convictions for possession of a controlled substance, firearms, flight from police, possession of stolen property and uttering threat. Mitigating factors
 
 Mr. Anderson has entered guilty pleas eliminating the need, burden and cost of a trial. 
 
 From the PSR and Gladue Reports, Mr. Anderson suffers from FASD and has significant Gladue factors in his life thereby reducing his moral culpability. Analysis
 
 This is a difficult case. Our courts have been clear that the tragic consequences of overdose deaths resulting from fentanyl demands harsh sanctions for those involved in its distribution. 
 
 What is also clear is that Mr. Anderson’s FASD significantly limits his ability to fully understand the impact his actions will have on others, to understand the consequences of all of his actions, or to learn from past mistakes. The result is a diminished moral responsibility in relation to the usual offender. 
 
 From the PSR, it appears Mr. Anderson has not taken meaningful steps to address issues that would take him out of that range proposed by Crown. At page 9 of Gladue Report, there is a note from the probation officer that “Mr. Anderson reported minimally at best and was a high risk to reoffend.”
 
 Following his release from custody in February of 2021, a recovery plan was put into place by Ask Wellness and John Howard Society. These groups worked with Mr. Anderson to access services, provide a stable residence, and set him up with part time work to earn money as he awaited admission to a vocational program that was to commence June 1, 2021. The training was directed at helping Mr. Anderson find work as a firefighter and work on pipelines. It appears Mr. Anderson did not follow through with the plan. I note that vocational training was around the offence date – June 11, 2021. 
 
 The defence highlights the McDonald decision and submits that the court can make a finding of reduced moral culpability based on Mr. Anderson’s FASD diagnosis and the significant Gladue factors in his life, and in doing so can deviate from a sentence that would be imposed in the regular course. In his submission, counsel for Mr. Anderson states that Mr. Anderson’s life is a mess and questions whether 18 months’ jail is appropriate after applying s. 718(2)(e) of the Criminal Code, and upon consideration of the Ipeelee and Gladue decisions. Specifically the over representation of Indigenous offenders in jail. 
 
 Mr. Anderson has prior convictions for possession of a controlled substance but this is his first conviction involving fentanyl and his first conviction for possession for the purpose of trafficking. While he has a prior record for possession of a controlled substance, I do not place much weight on this fact as he is entrenched in the street and drug culture and is an addict himself. 
Conclusion
 
 I find that Mr. Anderson was doomed at birth with FASD, which in and of itself is a direct reflection and outcome of colonial policies of this country. I also find that the significant Gladue factors in Mr. Anderson’s life and the lives of at least two prior generations of his family, place Mr Anderson at the lower end of the range of moral culpability.
 
 This is a difficult sentence to determine given the significant Gladue factors, Mr. Anderson’s FASD diagnosis and his reduced moral blameworthiness. This must be balanced with the aggravating factors and our Court’s views on a sentencing range where fentanyl is involved. The sentence must denounce the crime and deter Mr. Anderson and anyone else from committing the same offence. At the same time, the laws of our country have arrived at a place where courts are obligated to consider the Indigenous background factors in Mr. Anderson’s life, the systemic factors that contributed to the life Mr. Anderson lives and to be mindful of the over representation of Indigenous people in jail. 
 
 In the normal course, given the amount of fentanyl involved and upon consideration of the case law since the Smith decision, an appropriate sentence would be 24 months’ jail. Balancing Mr. Anderson’s reduced moral culpability, the significant Gladue factors in his background, and the overriding need to denounce and deter, I am reducing this sentence to 16 months.
 
 Accordingly, the sentence I impose is 16 months’ jail. I am not going to impose any probation, given that Mr. Anderson is already subject to probation on other matters. Adding another may overly complicate things for Mr. Anderson. As well, given Mr. Anderson’s prior convictions for breaching court orders and the fact that he was on probation and subject to a Release Order at the time of the offense, a Conditional Sentence Order is not appropriate in the circumstances. 
Ancillary Orders Forfeiture
 
 Pursuant to s. 16(1) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act forfeiting non-chemical offence- related property, I order that any right, title or interest of Darcy Dean Anderson, or any other person in the property listed as items number #1-4 of the attached major Exhibit Flowchart, in relation to Kamloops RCMP File 2021-19439, be forfeited to and vest in His Majesty the King in Right of Canada, to be disposed by the Minister of Public Works and Government Services or otherwise dealt with in accordance to the law by the member of the King’s Privy Council for Canada that is designated by the Governor in Council in accordance with the law. 
Weapons
 
 Pursuant to s. 109 of the Criminal Code, I impose a lifetime ban of the weapons set out in this section. 
DNA
 
 Count 2 on Information 111340-1 is a secondary designated offence. After considering the factors set out in s. 487.051(3) of the Criminal Code, I am satisfied that it is in the best interest of the administration of justice to authorize the taking of samples of bodily substances from you. The samples will be taken from you while you are in custody and you must submit to taking of the samples. 
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/pc/2023bcpc13.html
 


Mr. St. Martin is charged with “using an electronic device while he was driving” contrary to s. 214.2(1) of the Motor Vehicle Act. The date of the alleged offence is March 8, 2021. The matter is currently scheduled for trial on January 25, 2023, almost two years after the date of the incident. Mr. St. Martin applies to this Court pursuant to s. 24(1) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms for a judicial stay on the basis that his right to be tried within a reasonable time has been infringed, as protected by s. 11(b) of the Charter. Timeline
 


As with all applications of this nature, the timeline of the relevant events is of vital importance. In this case, there is no dispute with respect to the following: March 8, 2021



 Mr. St. Martin charged and given a violation ticket April 6, 2021





Mr. St. Martin files a Notice of Dispute January 4, 2022


 BC Provincial Court adjourned all traffic disputes scheduled to be heard from January 4 – 28, 2022 August 19, 2022


 Mr. St. Martin receives a Notice of Hearing (for October 27, 2022) October 13, 2022


Mr. St. Martin applies to adjourn the trial because a defence witness was not available – trial adjourned to January 25, 2023 November 2, 2022

 Mr. St. Martin files a Notice to seek a judicial stay based on delay November 30, 2022
 Hearing of the s. 11(b) argument January 25, 2023


Anticipated date of the trial The Jordan Framework
 


In R. v. Jordan, 2016 SCC 27, the Supreme Court of Canada set out the framework for the analysis to be undertaken in the application at bar. The court must first calculate the total amount of delay by considering the period between the laying of the charge, to the anticipated conclusion of the trial. From this period, the court must then subtract any delay that is attributable to the defence. Defence delay could either be any period that was waived, or any delay caused solely by the conduct of the defence.
 


If the resulting delay is greater than 18 months for proceedings in a provincial court, then the amount of delay is presumptively unreasonable. This presumption is, however, rebuttable if the Crown is able to show that there were exceptional circumstances. If the result is below the 18-month ceiling, then the delay is not presumptively unreasonable. In that case, it remains open to the defence to establish that it is nevertheless unreasonable by demonstrating that it took meaningful, sustained steps to expedite the proceedings. Application to the Case at Bar
 


Here, the Jordan clock started ticking when Mr. St. Martin received his violation ticket on March 8, 2021. The first trial date offered to him was October 27, 2022. This latter trial date was adjourned at Mr. St. Martin’s request because his witness was not available. As such, in my view, the clock “stopped ticking” on October 27, 2022 because any period thereafter was caused solely by the conduct of the defence. Before October 27, 2022, there was no defence waiver, nor did defence conduct result in any delay. Accordingly, the total passage of time under consideration is 19.5 months (from March 8, 2021 to October 27, 2022). This is still above the presumptive ceiling.
 


The Crown does not disagree with this calculation, but says that there was a discrete and exceptional event, namely the COVID-19 pandemic. In particular, because of a resurgence in cases during the latter months of 2021, the court had to cancel and adjourn traffic court proceedings between January 4 and 28, 2022. Numerous courts have found the COVID pandemic to be a discrete exceptional event as that term was used in Jordan (see for example R. v. Drummond, 2020 ONSC 5495; R. v. Folster, M.J. No. 187; R. v. Ali Ismail, 2020 BCPC 144; R. v. Khattra, 2020 ONSC 7894, R. v. Singh, Richmond Registry EA00047971, Sept 14, 2021 BCPC; R. v. Tan, 2021 BCPC 198; R. v. Gharibi, 2021 ONCJ 63). Cavanagh J. put it this way in Folster, supra, at para. 28: I will start out by saying that if COVID-19 is not a discrete and exceptional event, then I’m not sure what is. We find ourselves in a pandemic in which no one, let alone the Crown, has a full measure of control. The world has, literally, been turned upside down.
 


Consequently, as a starting point, the period between January 4 to 28, 2022 (24 days) should be deducted from the overall delay. Because of the resurgence of cases of COVID-19, it was necessary for the court to delay hearing traffic matters during that time for public safety and health reasons. But the impact of this health crisis should not be restricted only to those 24 days. As other judges have observed, it cannot be expected that, on the very first day the courts resume operation, everything would return to normal. There is a backlog of cases to administer, and the parties need some notice to organize themselves for trial. In R. v. Tan, my sister Judge Vandor said this at para. 23 in reference to the first period of time when the court suspended operations in 2020:
 
 I reject the defence's argument that only approximately two months is properly attributable to the COVID pandemic because this artificially constrains the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic to the relatively short period when court operations were actually suspended. It is not possible for every traffic matter adjourned between March 18th, 2020 and July 12th, 2020 to proceed immediately upon the limited reopening of traffic court on July 13th, 2020. A four-month backlog of cases does not disappear, particularly when considered in light of the added challenges of holding hearings in a safe manner – and in some cases at third locations – during the height of the pandemic.
 


These comments were adopted in R. v. Singh, (Richmond Registry EA00047971 Sept 14, 2021 BCPC) by my brother Judge Mah at para. 21.
 


Accordingly, the jurisprudence dictates that the court considers, on a more systemic level, the impact of the pandemic and court closures. It would be an error to look narrowly at the period during which the court suspended its operation. The question then, is how much delay is properly attributable to COVD-19 in this case. While the exercise does not lend itself to a precise mathematical formula, I note that Judge Vandor attributed a delay of just over 6 months to COVID-19 in reference to a suspension of court operations of 4 months (see para. 34). Judge Mah attributed a delay of 6 months in reference to the same suspension.
 
 In the case at bar, Mr. St. Martin allegedly committed this infraction on March 8, 2021. At the time, traffic court was operational and had resumed operation since July 13, 2020 in Kelowna. It is reasonable to think that, by March 2021, the system would have caught up with most of the backlog from the first suspension. Any residual effect from the first suspension would have been modest.
 
 However, in reaction to another wave of COVID-19 cases, the court suspended operations again for 24 days in January 2022. Under these circumstances, I am prepared to attribute 40 days of the overall delay to the exceptional and discrete event of the COVID-19 pandemic. Proportionally, it is comparable to what Judge Vandor and Judge Mah found in relation to the first 4-month suspension. I note also that the system was likely in a better position to handle the second suspension since there would have been existing protocols, equipment, and procedures in place. Any effect arising from the second suspension of operations was naturally less dramatic as the system had already dealt with the situation once before.
 
 The Crown had asked the court to attribute 3 months of delay in this case to the discrete and exceptional event of the COVID-19 pandemic. Mr. Schroeder says that this is a shorter period than the other cases cited. However, all of the other cases cited (understandably) reference the court closure between March and July of 2020 – a period of 4 months. As mentioned above, by the time Mr. St. Martin received his ticket, traffic court in Kelowna had already resumed operation for 7.5 months from the first closure. It could be, and should be, expected that the system will have mostly recovered from the backlog by that time. The first closure cannot justify an ongoing delay of 4 months ad infinitum. That proposition would result in a permanent heightening of the Jordan presumptive ceiling to 22 months. There is no rational basis to come to that conclusion. Indeed, both Judge Vandor and Judge Mah assessed the delay occasioned by the first suspension at 6 months. By implication, both judges concluded that any backlog or residual effect had been essentially resolved by September 2020 (6 months after March 2020). As such, I disagree with the Crown’s position that 3 months ought to be attributed to COVD-19. In my view, that overestimates the effect the second court closure would have had.
 
 I pause to say that the assessment of delay attributable to this discrete and exceptional event is particular to the facts of this case. Jurisprudence arising out of other jurisdictions, or even other levels of court in this province are of limited value since the operational constraints those courts faced, and the manner in which they reacted to the crisis, were necessarily different. As such, cases coming out of the Provincial Court of BC are infinitely more relevant.
 
 Returning then to the calculation, the total delay is 19.5 months, which is over the presumptive ceiling. Reducing that period by 40 days as a result of the court closure due to the COVID-19 pandemic, that leaves a period of just over 18 months. This still remains over the presumptive ceiling. The Crown made no further argument as to additional deductions from the overall delay. This is not a complex case that requires any further adjustment to the time calculation. Consequently, I find the delay occasioned in this case to be unreasonable. Summary and Conclusion
 
 Mr. St. Martin was given a violation ticket on March 8, 2021. He was given a trial date of October 27, 2022. In January 2022, the court suspended the hearing of traffic tickets for 24 days due to a resurgence of COVID-19 cases. This Court assesses the delay arising from that exceptional and discrete event to be 40 days. There was otherwise no waiver of delay or any defence conduct that caused the delay. The remaining delay is just over 18 months, which is still above the presumptive ceiling. There is no further justification for this passage of time. The delay, therefore, is unreasonable in this case and Mr. St. Martin’s right to be tried within a reasonable time has been infringed. The proper remedy is that of a judicial stay and I so order.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/pc/2023bcpc11.html
 


Mr. Ingram has pled guilty to an offence under the Land Act, RSBC 1996, c. 245, for excavating on Crown land contrary to s. 60(e) and thus, will be sentenced under the Offence Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 338. This offence occurred in relation to the Six Peaks Dinosaur Track Site (“SPDT”) near Hudson’s Hope, British Columbia. Mr. Ingram, along with a Mr. McNolty and two other men, used a combination of power tools and heavy-duty hand tools to excavate and remove fossilized dinosaur footprints which formed part of identified dinosaur trackways. Mr. McNolty earlier pled guilty to this offence and received a sentence of 30 days’ custody, plus a fine of $20,000 and a Victim of Crime Surcharge of $3,000, pursuant to a joint sentencing recommendation. 
 


Here, the Crown seeks a sentence of 30-35 days’ custody plus a fine of $20,000 and a Victim of Crime Surcharge of 15%. Counsel for the defendant urges that a suspended sentence of 12-months’ probation, including 120 hours of community service and a fine of $10,000, would be more appropriate in the circumstances of his client. 
 


The issue before this Court is to determine a fit sentence for Mr. Ingram.
 


In determining the sentence to be imposed here, I will address the facts, the law and the considerations I must apply in the following order: A.
 
What is the nature of palaeontological resources and the resultant loss?













 
i.
 scientific loss;













 
ii.
cultural loss;












 
iii.
 natural resource loss. B.
 What is the applicable law in relation to sentencing similar regulatory offences? C.
 What are Mr. Ingram’s personal circumstances? 
D.
 What is a fit sentence for Mr. Ingram? A.
 WHAT IS THE NATURE OF PALAEONTOLOGICAL RESOURCES AND THE RESULTANT LOSS?
 


All fossil footprint sites represent palaeontological resources that fall under the general category of natural resources. The SPDT is situated just outside the Tumbler Ridge UNESCO Global Geopark near Hudson’s Hope in British Columbia and is anticipated to be included in the Klin-se-za Provincial Park. The site was discovered in 2008 and first studied by an international team of palaeontologists in the summer of 2016. 
 


Vandalism of the site was reported in July 2020 and investigation revealed that power tools and heavy-duty hand tools had been used to remove fossilized tracks in six discrete areas, which resulted in collateral damage to additional tracks and areas of track-bearing strata. Upon being designated under the Land Act in 2016, a sign had been posted at the SPDT that stated: PROTECTED SITE
This site is designated for its
 significant paleontological resources. Research is being conducted by
 authorized personnel. Damaging site is an offence.
The sign was removed and discarded when the SPDT site was damaged.
 


Surveillance photos and witnesses reported four men driving in two vehicles and using power tools to remove individual tracks from the site over a period of at least 2½ hours. Large slabs of fossil tracks were either removed, or were damaged by being broken up, and were possibly destroyed. The power tools used included a portable generator, air compressor and air chisel, and heavy-duty hand tools including sledgehammers and pry bars. Mr. Ingram was observed using a sledgehammer and pry bar and other excavation tools.
 


Investigation determined that Mr. Ingram drove one of the vehicles and Mr. McNolty drove the other vehicle along with the two unidentified men. The excavation work was halted only when two separate groups of witnesses arrived and began observing the work, at which point the four men packed up their equipment and departed. 
 


No fossil tracks removed from the site have ever been recovered. 









 
i.

 
scientific loss
 
 Preliminary studies of the SPDT determined an assemblage of over 500 dinosaur footprints over approximately 750 square metres. These tracks represent diverse dinosaurs from the Early Cretaceous epoch who walked on sandy ground approximately 125-113 million years ago, following which their tracks were fossilized. The dinosaur tracks include three of the major groups of dinosaurs that lived during that period, specifically: theropods; ornithopods; and sauropods. 
 
 The SPDT comprises one of the largest found in Western Canada in more than a generation and is noted for its potential to yield a large dataset. As one of the 10 most important track sites in North America, it is objectively ranked as a “high value” track site on national and global dinosaur listings. Based on objective scientific, cultural and natural resource indicators, the site was ranked as one of the most important in Western Canada and potentially in North America. As a result, on October 17, 2016, the SPDT was awarded protected status under the Land Act for five years. This designation prohibits any activity or use other than conservation and preservation. 
 
 The SPDT is made up of not only dinosaur tracks, but track sequences or “trackways” that represent the passage of a single animal and in this instance, represent approximately 56 distinct animal trackways. Tracks themselves occupy an unusual category of palaeontological resource, as, unlike skeletal fossils commonly seen in museums, dinosaur tracks exist on surfaces that themselves represent portions of the ancient landscape that have become part of the current physical and cultural landscape via natural erosion or excavation. Trackways also evidence how the dinosaur lived, moved, its gait and behaviour. Damaging and removing an individual footprint not only destroys that footprint for its scientific value, it also disturbs the integrity of the remaining tracks and landscape and the series of tracks of which it was part. 
 
 The composition of the SPDT track-bearing surface is 8-10 cm thick sandstone, which is normally resistant to natural erosion. Due to the damage caused during the illegal excavation, however, it is now far more susceptible to deterioration through natural processes. Cracks or fractures have been created that will now more rapidly accelerate otherwise natural erosion and as a result, a significant degree of scientific information has been lost and will continue to be lost as the damage now naturally propagates.












ii.


cultural loss
 
 Fossil footprints such as the SPDT are frequently linked to Indigenous peoples’ traditional stories and form valued parts of their cultural heritage. A Community Impact Statement from the Saulteau First Nations Treaty Rights and Environmental Protection Department was received. The statement noted that the destruction of tracks occurred in the Saulteau First Nation’s “backyard” and was very disturbing. The SPDT is located on the traditional territory of the Saulteau First Nations and as a result of this destruction, the community feels less safe and their enjoyment of the area as a place of solace or “peaceful enjoyment” is disrupted. Several additional First Nations cultural locations are found close to the SPDT and community members are now fearful that additional acts of vandalism may occur in these otherwise remote and culturally important areas.
 
 A Victim Impact Statement was also received from Dr. Helm, who, along with two youths, is the person that initially discovered the SPDT in 2000, contacted palaeontologists and thereafter, has undertaken his own graduate level palaeontology studies. As a direct result of his discovery, the Tumbler Ridge Museum Foundation and the Dinosaur Discovery Gallery as a tourist attraction and palaeontological research centre have been formed. Also as a direct result, financial support from the Dalglish Family Foundation was combined with support from the area First Nations, local volunteers and international experts to conduct the initial scientific excavation of the SPDT.










 
iii.
 
natural resource loss
 
 As a natural resource, a commercial value is often associated with the resource when managed by lawful agencies such as governments. Palaeontological resources are normally only excavated, exploited, or otherwise handled under strict permit and regulation, as the “value” of the resource is supported by remaining in the public domain in perpetuity, in either state museums or formally-protected areas. Dinosaur footprints when found in trackways such as SPDT are best left and preserved in place, where they serve as both an onsite palaeontological resource and an educational and interpretative tourist destination. In the case of trackways, this is even more critical, as public education and interpretation of the now extinct animals are made possible through observations of intact trackways.
 
 The Saulteau First Nations maintain a community initiative, the Carbon Lake Lodge Restoration Project, in close proximity to the SPDT. This project is a community initiative and includes an economic development model that would include eco-tours of the fossil site and as such, the damage to the SPDT has had an immediate and long-term economic impact on their plans. B.
WHAT IS THE APPLICABLE LAW IN RELATION TO SENTENCING SIMILAR REGULATORY OFFENCES?
 
 Regulatory legislation exists to protect the public or broad segments of the public from the potentially adverse effects of otherwise lawful activity, and emphasizes public protection and societal interests over protecting individual interests, deterrence and punishment for past and inherently wrongful conduct. Regulatory measures seek to prevent future harm through enforcing minimum standards of conduct and care (R. v. Wholesale Travel Group Inc., 1991 CanLII 39 (SCC), at p. 219). This said, the leading Canadian case of R. v. Terroco Industries Ltd., 2005 ABCA 141, at paras 53 and 60, states that breaches of regulations established to protect the environment should emphasize specific and general deterrence. 
 
 Regulatory offences and crimes do embody different concepts of fault, as the former are directed primarily to the consequences of conduct and thus normally import a significantly lesser degree of culpability than conviction of a true crime. The concept of fault in regulatory offences is based upon a reasonable care standard and not moral blameworthiness as is found in criminal fault. This said, regulatory breaches may still create serious harm on large segments of society and thus, sentencing for regulatory breaches should not downplay the potential harm to the vulnerable, nor the potential for responsibility of the offender (Wholesale at pp. 219-220).
 
 Sentencing principles involving environmental offences require a “special approach” (Terroco at para 34). Regulatory punishments in environmental cases should be and are varied to account with the nature of the affected environment and the extent of damage inflicted (R. v. United Keno Hill Mines Ltd., 1980 CarswellYukon 9, Y.J. No. 10 at para 11). 
 
 A significant factor in environmental-offence sentencing is that of culpability, based on the circumstances of what occurred and consideration of reasonable foreseeability. This can range from a due diligence “near miss” where the danger is obscure through a failure to take reasonable care, to outright intent to breach the regulation regardless of the danger (Terroco at paras 35-37).
 
 There are few examples of regulatory prosecution for similar offences. Mr. Ingram’s co-accused, Mr. McNolty, was sentenced to the maximum fine under the regulation, $20,000, plus Victim of Crime Surcharge, plus a custodial sentence in the mid-range of that allowed under the legislation, or 30 days. This was pursuant to a joint sentence recommendation of defence counsel and the Crown and in his brief oral reasons, Judge Fleck noted that given mitigating circumstances before the court, notably an absence of a criminal record and Mr. McNolty’s demonstrated remorse, the sentence was a fit one (R. v. Bennward Ingram and Austin McNolty, (unreported) October 18, 2021, no. 36836-2-C, Fort St. John Registry (BC PC)).
 
 Counsel for Mr. Ingram urged that as this Court is not aware of the mitigating circumstances considered for his co-accused Mr. McNulty, that sentence and the principle of parity thus engaged should be given little weight. That would run contrary to the finding in R. v. Christie, 2004 ABCA 287 (CanLII), and since adopted by BC courts including R. v. Bingley, 2021 BCCA 444 (CanLII). There, the court emphasized that parity as a principle must be accounted for in all sentences and in particular, where the offence is one of joint venture (Bingley, para 13). In Christie, the court was faced with a similar situation as this: a co-accused had been sentenced pursuant to a joint submission. The court there noted that while factors leading to a joint submission that the sentencing court may not be aware of complicated the analysis, ultimately the co-accused’s sentence must still be considered (Christie at para 46).
 
 In R. v. Haensel, (unreported) April 27, 2022, no. 35396-1, Cranbrook Registry (BC PC), the offender pled guilty to two counts of removing and trafficking Burgess Shale fossils contrary to the Canada National Parks Act. Mr. Haensel both sold and donated for scientific study, fossils he personally removed from the site. In sentencing Mr. Haensel, the court noted the seriousness of his offence, involving as it did: one of the most significant fossil finds in the world; the deliberate nature of his acts; Canada’s obligation to conserve such artefacts for the benefit of future generations; that Mr. Haensel himself was a youthful student of palaeontology and without a criminal record; and that any future in the palaeontology field was now impossible given the convictions. The court, citing Terroco as the leading Canadian decision on environmental sentencing, accepted a joint sentence recommendation (“JSR”) and imposed a five-month conditional sentence order (“CSO”) with significant curfew and related conditions. The court also imposed a fine of $20,000 that was not the subject of the JSR.
 
 Counsel for Mr. Ingram argued to distinguish the sentence imposed in Haensel, suggesting that the acts in that matter were more serious, yet only a five-month CSO was imposed. I do not agree with this characterization – a CSO remains a custodial sentence, a “sword of Damocles” with significant restrictions on the offender. Likewise in that case, the offender, through his actions, had suffered the collateral consequence of losing a potentially significant career in palaeontology. Likewise, I was urged to accept the reasoning expressed in R. v. Lee, 2012 ABCA 17 (CanLII), where at paras 38-39 the court cited R. v. Proulx, 2000 SCC 5 (CanLII), for the proposition that courts should be wary of placing too great an emphasis on deterrence when choosing between a CSO and incarceration. Unfortunately here, as conceded by both Crown and counsel, a CSO is not available to this Court as the offence committed was contrary to the Land Act, which, along with the Offence Act, precludes such a sentence (R. v. Naidu, 2017 BCSC 671 (CanLII), paras 38-41; R. v. Corbett, 2005 BCSC 1437 (CanLII), paras 22-26; and R. v. Wong, 2017 BCSC 1030 (CanLII), para 35). C.
WHAT ARE MR. INGRAM’S PERSONAL CIRCUMSTANCES?
 
 Mr. Ingram is 39 years old, has a grade 12 education and has no prior involvement before the courts. He and his young family live in Pincher Creek, Alberta where he works as an excavator operator and is the sole source of support for the family. He currently also supports a refugee from the war in the Ukraine and sponsors a Guatemalan child through World Vision. Mr. Ingram frankly admitted to the court he had no excuse for his actions, that he did not appreciate the importance of the site to the First Nations or science, and expressed deep remorse for his actions and the damage he created. D.
WHAT IS A FIT SENTENCE FOR MR. INGRAM?
 
 The Crown in this matter, citing both general deterrence and parity, is seeking a custodial sentence of 30-35 days, plus a fine of $20,000 and Victim of Crime Surcharge. Crown did provide the sentencing judge’s oral reasons for Mr. Ingram’s co-accused Mr. McNolty; however, was unable to advise this Court of what aggravating or mitigating circumstances were placed before that court in agreeing to the JSR. In contrast, counsel for Mr. Ingram suggests that a suspended sentence involving 120 hours of community work service, plus a $10,000 fine, is appropriate, citing the mitigating factors present in Mr. Ingram’s situation.
 
 I find as aggravating factors the following: the harm done to the trackways was significant, permanent and will continue to cause damage well into the future as natural erosion is now accelerated through the damage done; actual harm and the degree of that harm, as well as the potential for harm to the environment, are properly considered as aggravating circumstances at sentencing for environmental offences. This is particularly so where an affected environment is a delicate site not easily rejuvenated, or where the cost of repair or mitigation of damages is significant (Terroco at paras 45, 48-51).
 
 The deliberate nature of these acts are also aggravating. Mr. Ingram, in company with others, used heavy-duty hand and power tools to remove fossils from a remote site, causing significant damage to the surrounding trackway over a period in excess of 2½ hours and only ceasing when they became aware that witnesses were present. This evidences planning and preparation, effort to obtain the fossils, and an understanding at the time of the wrongfulness of their acts, as they fled the scene once they were aware of being observed.
 
 Victims of this offence are particularly wide ranging. Beginning with the Saulteau First Nations, their traditional territory has been damaged, a source of cultural reflection has been interfered with and along with the rest of BC, a potential source of economic development has been harmed. Next, are those citizens of British Columbia and Canada whose educational opportunities have been retarded. Lastly, is the scientific community whose research and insight have been damaged, potentially with longer and more far-reaching consequences as natural erosion is accelerated through the acts of Mr. Ingram.
 
 In mitigation, I note the following: Mr. Ingram entered an early guilty plea, which, for an environmental offence, is properly considered a mitigating factor (Terroco at para 39); Mr. Ingram has no prior criminal record; and this Court received numerous letters of support speaking to the uncharacteristic nature of his offence and his otherwise positive character. In particular, I note a letter from Mr. Ingram’s employer who noted Mr. Ingram as an above-average worker and long-time friend.
 
 Where such offences as this are committed, general deterrence must be emphasized. Sites like the SPDT are often in remote locations that are not easily monitored and rely on courts like this to impose sentences that will give pause to others who may seek to engage in the same behaviour. Likewise, I must also consider the principle of parity, noting that by imposing a similar sentence to that imposed on a co-accused for the same offence avoids bitterness and resentment that may otherwise be found by the recipient of a harsher sentence and therefore, reduce the chance of rehabilitation (Bingley at para 14). In so doing, I note that the Honourable Judge Fleck in McNolty at para 4 considered that absent the significant mitigating circumstances before him, a harsher sentence would have been imposed.
 
 Having directed my mind to the circumstances of the offence, to the sentencing decisions cited above that deal with similar acts, and to the circumstances of Mr. Ingram, I find as a fit sentence the following:
 
 Mr. Ingram, you are sentenced on count 1 of the information to a custodial sentence of 25 days. In addition, I am ordering a fine of $15,000, payable no later than January 31, 2027. The Victim of Crime Surcharge also applies and shall be due no later than January 31, 2027.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/pc/2023bcpc7.html
 


Dylan Pelly has pled guilty to committing a home invasion of a legal, licenced marihuana grow operation in Abbotsford, BC, on January 10, 2018. Mr. Pelly was one of three men who burst into a home using firearms or imitations thereof, and he and the other two perpetrators were masked. The home was occupied by a man and his 16-year-old son, both of whom had their hands tied behind their backs with zap straps. The specific pleas were to break and enter, robbery, and using an imitation firearm while committing the robbery.
 


Beginning in May of 2019, the police targeted Mr. Pelly in an undercover operation to elicit statements confirming Mr. Pelly’s involvement in the home invasion. Mr. Pelly not only gave a full account of his involvement in the home invasion, but he also supplied firearms and fentanyl to the undercover officers. Between August 6 and November 12, 2019, Mr. Pelly sold the undercover officers a total of 943 grams of fentanyl at a combined price of $82,000. He also sold to the undercover officers a small 25-calibre Raven Arms semi-automatic handgun, which is a prohibited firearm, a Smith and Wesson semi-automatic pistol, which is a restricted firearm, and a Colt semi-automatic pistol, a prohibited firearm.
 


The Provincial Crown is prosecuting the above offences by indictment under information 93480.
 


Mr. Pelly also pled guilty to two other drug offences arising from a separate investigation and search warrant on his home. On July 12, 2018, he unlawfully possessed 2.25 grams of heroin/fentanyl, 34.11 grams of fentanyl, and 36.17 grams of cocaine for the purposes of trafficking. The Federal Crown is prosecuting these offences by indictment separately under information 90099.
 


All of the above offences are serious crimes under the Criminal Code and Controlled Drugs and Substances Act. The Provincial Crown and defence counsel have presented the court with a joint submission for the home invasion, firearms and drug offences under information 93480. They are submitting that Mr. Pelly ought to serve a total jail sentence of five and one-half years, including two years for the home invasion offences consecutive to three and one-half years for the firearms trafficking and three and one-half years for the drug trafficking, with the three and one-half year sentences being concurrent to each other.
 


However, the Federal Crown is seeking an additional three and one-half years of jail, consecutive to any other sentence, for the possession for the purposes of trafficking offences under information 90099. This would mean a total jail sentence for Mr. Pelly of nine years.
 


Defence counsel submits that the jail sentence sought by the Federal Crown should be two or two and a half years. However, he strongly argues that this sentence ought to be concurrent to the other trafficking jail sentences, and in any event, the total jail sentence should be five and one-half years using the totality principle. Defence counsel argues that Mr. Pelly was committing crimes to feed his own drug addiction, and he has done extremely well during his time in pre-trial custody. The home invasion should be consecutive to any other sentence.
 


The central issue here is determining the appropriate jail sentence for Mr. Pelly for these serious crimes. As always, I bear in mind the general sentencing principles under s.718 and following in the Criminal Code. Denunciation and deterrence come to the forefront for these serious home invasion and trafficking crimes, but the real possibility of rehabilitation here cannot be overlooked.
 


The main area of contention is whether the jail sentence for the possession for the purpose of trafficking offences under information 90099 ought to be concurrent or consecutive to the other five and one-half year jail sentence, and most importantly, whether the overall jail sentence ought to exceed five and one-half years applying the totality principle. CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE HOME INVASION (Counts 1, 2 and 6 of 93480)
 
 An Agreed Statement of Facts was filed concerning the home invasion and firearms and drug offences under information 93480. In the early hours of January 10, 2018, Mr. Pelly was one of three masked and armed men who broke into a residence at 2237 Windsor Street in Abbotsford. A legal, licenced marihuana operation was located in a shop on the property across the yard from a residence occupied by Shawn Lecy and his 16-year-old son. The marihuana operation was owned by Mr. Lecy’s friend.
 
 Mr. Pelly had been recruited by an associate, Bryan Lehman, now deceased. Three to four other men arrived in the area in three vehicles. At about 4:00 am, Mr. Pelly, Mr. Lehman, and a third man approached the front door of the residence and Mr. Pelly was armed with a shotgun or imitation thereof. Mr. Lehman pried the front door with a crowbar, and Mr. Pelly kicked the door in. The three men then entered the home.
 
 The 16-year-old son saw a male holding a shotgun in the hallway, and then Mr. Pelly told him to put his hands up and get onto the floor. The 16-year-old’s father, Mr. Lecy, was brought upstairs, and Mr. Lehman tied the hands of the father and son using zap straps. Mr. Lehman retrieved Mr. Lecy’s keys and asked which key opened the shop. The cell phones belonging to Mr. Lecy and his son were thrown in a toilet.
 
 Mr. Pelly stayed with Mr. Lecy and his son and told them to cooperate. He said they were not there to hurt them; they were there for the marihuana and the money. Mr. Pelly told them his finger was not on the trigger and he was trying not to point the gun at the 16 year old. However, the two other men initially had their guns pointed at the 16 year old. Mr. Pelly told Mr. Lecy not to be a hero and that he was not going to hurt his son because he had a son of his own. 
 
 While Mr. Pelly was in the residence, other men stole live marihuana plants and cut marihuana from the shop and loaded these items in Mr. Lecy’s pickup truck. About 60 plants and some dried marihuana were stolen.
 
 In total, the suspects stole Mr. Lecy’s pickup truck, his cigarettes and pain medication, and marihuana in the shop. Mr. Lehman said he was there for the weed not the money, but Mr. Pelly later removed $500 cash from Mr. Lecy’s wallet. Mr. Lehman said to Mr. Lecy to look for his truck on Bradner Road, and it was later recovered by police.
 
 When the suspects left, the 16 year old was able to free himself from his zap straps, and his father went downstairs to get a pair of cutters which were used by his son to cut his zap straps.
 
 Through investigative measures, the police identified both Mr. Pelly and Mr. Lehman as suspects in the home invasion. Beginning in May of 2019, the police targeted Mr. Pelly in an undercover operation designed to elicit incriminating statements confirming his involvement in the home invasion. Over time, the undercover officers held themselves out as influential underworld figures, and they recruited Mr. Pelly to perform work for a purported criminal organization.
 
 The undercover officers also said they could assist Mr. Pelly regarding the home invasion by providing him with a false alibi and by having someone else take the blame. On the strength of these assurances, Mr. Pelly provided a full account of his involvement in the home invasion, and this account was largely consistent with the statements of Mr. Lecy and his son.
 
 Defence counsel points out that Mr. Pelly was recruited for the home invasion and he was drug addicted. He even asked Mr. Lecy where the “oxy pills” were. CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE FIREARM AND DRUG TRAFFICKING (Counts 7, 9, 11, and 13 of 93480)
 
 Throughout the undercover operations, Mr. Pelly made numerous offers to supply firearms and fentanyl to the undercover officers. He bragged about his connections to the Independent Soldiers gang and his proficiency in mixing fentanyl.
 
 On August 6, 2019, Mr. Pelly sold an undercover officer 27.22 grams of fentanyl within a box of granola bars for $2,500. On August 12, 2019, Mr. Pelly sold an undercover officer 85.9 grams of fentanyl within a box of Ritz crackers for $7,500.
 
 On September 1, 2019, Mr. Pelly sold 141.78 grams of fentanyl in a box of cereal to an undercover officer for $12,000. Previously, Mr. Pelly had offered the undercover officer one free firearm so long as the undercover officer continued to buy fentanyl from him. The cereal box also contained one small 25-calibre Raven Arms semi-automatic handgun with three rounds of ammunition in the magazine (Count 7).
 
 On September 8, 2019, Mr. Pelly sold an undercover officer 142.92 grams of fentanyl in a cereal box for $12,000, although the initial funds were $1,000 short and paid later. There was also discussion of the purchase of a 9-millimeter calibre handgun, but that sale was delayed because Mr. Pelly said he needed to keep the handgun for a few days as someone had pulled a gun on him the night before and he was going to “deal with that today.”
 
 On September 12, 2019, Mr. Pelly arranged to meet with an undercover officer to sell the 9-millimetre handgun. Mr. Pelly talked about someone working for him who now owed him money after being caught using Mr. Pelly’s profits to buy drugs. Mr. Pelly also spoke about how the fentanyl came from the “brown guys”, but he was the one who mixed the fentanyl. He further said that the person who pulled a gun on him and stole product had now returned the drugs after being threatened. Mr. Pelley provided the undercover officer with a make-up bag containing a Smith & Wesson 9-millimetre semi-automatic handgun (Count 9).
 
 On September 18, 2019, Mr. Pelly handed an undercover officer a taco kit containing 198.3 grams of fentanyl for $17,500. He was driven by his mother in her vehicle. At a meeting on September 21, 2019, Mr. Pelly told an undercover officer he had access to crates of firearms which came from the United States.
 
 On October 2, 2019, Mr. Pelley sold an undercover officer 149.14 grams of fentanyl in a Quaker Oats box for $12,500. On October 11, 2019, Mr. Pelly inquired about when more fentanyl was to be purchased as he wanted to keep the business going. He sold an undercover officer 142.63 grams of fentanyl in a popcorn box for $12,500.
 
 Prior to October 21, 2019, Mr. Pelly told an undercover officer that he had a 9-millimetre calibre handgun to sell for $2,500. On October 21, he sold that handgun with nine rounds of ammunition for $2,500 and indicated he was not making a profit (Count 11). He had lined up a new source of firearms.
 
 On November 5, 2019, Mr. Pelly sold an undercover officer 30.69 grams of fentanyl in a Kleenex box for $2,750. The last sale of fentanyl occurred on November 12, 2019: 29.76 grams for $2,750.
 
 Defence counsel submits that Mr. Pelly was a heavy fentanyl user and this is confirmed in other documentation. He was at the height of his addiction during the home invasion in January of 2018, and he did not address his addiction until after he was charged under information 90099 in March of 2020. He sold drugs to the undercover officers to feed his drug habit. Mr. Pelly kept his drug use from the undercover officers.
 
 Over the course of nine separate transactions, Mr. Pelly sold a total of 943 grams of fentanyl for a combined price of $82,000. The street value of the fentanyl, quantified as 33 ounces, is between $140,250 and $149,600. CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE POSSESSION FOR THE PURPOSE OF TRAFFICKING OFFENCES - INFORMATION 90099
 
 The two possession for the purpose of trafficking counts under Information 90099 arise from a separate investigation. This investigation happened after the home invasion but before the undercover operation. There is no joint submission for these offences.
 
 In July of 2018, the Abbotsford police department received information from informants that Mr. Pelly was involved in a dial-a-dope operation while residing with his mother.
 
 Between July 3 and July 10, 2018, the police carried out surveillance of a residence linked to Mr. Pelly at 34576 Pearl Avenue in Abbotsford. The police observed activity consistent with drug trafficking, including a person who attended the property six times to likely supply drugs. Garbage from the residence contained score sheets and sandwich bags with cocaine residue. A search warrant of the residence was granted on the basis of this and other information.
 
 Mr. Pelly and his mother were arrested away from the residence on July 12, 2018. They were not charged until March 4, 2020. During the arrest and following a Charter warning, Mr. Pelly’s mother told police illegal drugs were in a make-up case in the living room of the residence. Also during the arrest, one of Mr. Pelly’s cell phones rang and a female was requesting “50 D”, meaning “down” or heroin/fentanyl. An officer actually went to the location where the “down” was to be sold and observed a woman seen in prior surveillance.
 
 The search warrant was executed on the Pearl Avenue residence on July 12, 2018. In Mr. Pelly’s bedroom there were empty baggies and two scales with cocaine, heroin and fentanyl residue. An envelope contained 8.2 grams of a form of fentanyl. There was also a safe containing $2,090 cash, vials of cocaine, five bags of caffeine (often a buffing agent), two bags of purple fentanyl, and a loaded handgun magazine.
 
 Scoresheets were found in the kitchen. More scoresheets were found in the living room and the make-up bag was located there. The make-up bag contained two scales, empty baggies, and two bags of cocaine.
 
 In the lower level of the house, the police found drug paraphernalia, scales, a dish with fentanyl residue, sandwich bags, spoons with cocaine residue and baking soda, another buffer agent. Fentanyl was located on a television stand and there was a pill bottle containing brown heroin/fentanyl.
 
 In total, the home contained 2.25 grams of heroin/fentanyl with a street value of $420, 34.11 grams of fentanyl with a street value of $6,780, and 36.17 grams of cocaine with a street value of $2,840.
 
 All counsel agree Mr. Pelly was a mid-level drug dealer, although defence counsel suggests Mr. Pelly was on the low end of that categorization. VICTIM IMPACT
 
 Regarding the home invasion, limited victim impact information is contained in the Pre-Sentence Report written March 7, 2022. Mr. Lecy and his son did not want to provide a formal impact statement to the Crown, as they did not wish to dredge up negative feelings associated with the experience.
 
 Mr. Lecy did tell the Pre-Sentence writer that he and his son suffered emotional distress because of the home invasion, including difficulty sleeping. Mr. Lecy experienced trauma because a gun was pointed at him and his son. He sold the Windsor Street residence in part due to the home invasion.
 
 I would only add that the marihuana operation was legal and licenced. People expect to be safe and secure when carrying out these activities, and the home invasion must have been a harrowing experience to say the very least.
 
 Regarding the drug offences, in particular the ones involving fentanyl, the victim impact on communities is brutal. As recently stated by Moldaver J. in R. v. Parranto, 2021 SCC 46, the trafficking of fentanyl “has altered the landscape of the substance abuse crisis in Canada, revealing itself as public enemy number one.”
 
 The BC Coroners Service Report titled “Illicit Drug Toxicity Deaths in BC January 1, 2012 – October 31, 2022” summarizes all unintentional illicit drug toxicity deaths in BC from 2012 to September 30, 2022. In September of 2022 alone, there were 171 suspected illicit drug toxicity deaths, an 8% increase from the previous September. About 5.7 people died each day in September of 2022 from illicit drug toxicity.
 
 When Mr. Pelly was committing his drug offences in 2018, 1,562 people died in BC in that year from illicit drug toxicity. Specifically, 151 people died in BC in July of 2018, the month when the search warrant was executed on Mr. Pelly’s home. From 2012 to 2021, among the drug types involved in illicit drug toxicity death investigations, illicit fentanyl has increased from 5% in 2012 to 87% in 2021.
 
 The Coroners Report goes on to focus on specific communities in BC. In 2018, when Mr. Pelly possessed illicit drugs for the purpose of trafficking, 41 people died in Abbotsford from illicit drug toxicity. Forty-four people died such deaths in Abbotsford in 2019, when Mr. Pelly committed the other drug offences.
 
 Regarding the victim impact of firearms offences, I can only echo what was said in R. v. Howell, O.J. No. 4585 at para. 21: Those who engage in the unlawful trafficking of firearms can only expect stern treatment from the courts. Many of the murders, and much of the violent crime in this city involve the use of firearms. Many of our citizens feel insecure in their communities because of the presence of guns. …
 
 Although that case referred to Ontario communities, the remarks apply equally to Abbotsford. Indeed, I will end this victim impact discussion by focussing on Abbotsford. Abbotsford is a wonderful community, full of pastoral farms and bustling family neighbourhoods. But Abbotsford also has a gang problem. It has an illegal drug problem. It has an illegal gun problem. A strong message must be sent that if you decide to become a gun toting drug dealer, there will be stern consequences from the courts. CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE OFFENDER
 
 Mr. Pelly is now 27 years old, and he was between 22 and 23 years of age when he committed all these offences. He has no criminal record.
 
 According to the Pre-Sentence Report, Mr. Pelly’s father was murdered when Mr. Pelly was only three or four years old. Mr. Pelly was sexually abused by a male babysitter when he was seven. His stepfather was physically abusive. At age 15, he did have a positive relationship with a subsequent stepfather.
 
 Defence counsel also indicated that Mr. Pelly was a small child and he was picked on, so he sought out older kids.
 
 Mr. Pelly is in a relationship with a Ms. McNeill and they are engaged to be married. He completed Grade 10 in school, and he has had sporadic labour jobs. He has now completed his high school equivalency while in pre-trial custody.
 
 Mr. Pelly indicated in the Pre-Sentence Report that he was diagnosed with borderline personality disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, as well as anxiety and depression. He began smoking marihuana around the age of twelve which escalated to powder cocaine by age 17. At age 20, his drug use diversified to heroin and fentanyl. While in pre-trial custody, he completed the twelve session substance abuse management program.
 
 A Fraser Health assessment dated August 7, 2020 states that Mr. Pelly had been using fentanyl since age 20. He reported being clean for two months. He was diagnosed with substance abuse disorder in early remission, substance induced mood disorder, and antisocial personality traits.
 
 Defence counsel again emphasized that in 2019 and earlier, Mr. Pelly would do anything to get drugs to feed his fentanyl drug habit. He would use as much as 3.5 grams of fentanyl per day at a cost of $400 per day. He sold drugs and guns to the undercover officers while he was under the influence of drugs to which he was addicted. Those officers posed as underworld people with influence and money.
 
 Mr. Pelly was not charged with the possession for the purpose of trafficking charges under Information 90090 until March of 2020, and he was not charged with the home invasion and gun/drug trafficking under Information 93480 until May of 2021, after which he was in custody. He tried to get clean as of August 2020 and he sought out counselling and met his fiancé, Ms. McNeill.
 
 Mr. Pelly has achieved much since being in pre-trial custody as of June 1, 2021. He has taken virtually every course offered by the pre-trial facility. Mr. Pelly completed modules one to five of the Healthy Relationships and Employability Skills programs. He did the three levels of the Substance Abuse Program. He finished courses called Money Management, Communication Skills, Housing Needs, Learning to Live for Life, Nutrition and Health, and What’s Next. He also completed the Substance Abuse and Living without Violence Core Programs, as well as 18 modules of Essential Skills for Success and other programs.
 
 While in custody, Mr. Pelly acquired his Grade 12 equivalency with high marks in English and math. He has plans for post secondary education while incarcerated.
 
 Mr. Pelly intends to marry Ms. McNeill and she wrote a compelling letter of support. Ms. McNeill is the mother of two children and has been an instructor and now an advocate for troubled youth. Mr. Pelly’s sister, family friend, and former girlfriend wrote letters of support, focussing on his positive change in attitude.
 
 I accept that Mr. Pelly made tremendous progress while in custody and he has maintained his sobriety. He spoke to the court, apologized for his actions and said the court would never see him again. He realizes he deserves punishment, but his prior actions were fuelled by his addiction. He has learned a lot about himself, and he is now a different person. SENTENCING PRINCIPLES Joint Submission on Information 93480
 
 The Provincial Crown and defence counsel have arrived at a joint submission under Information 93840 for a five and one-half year total jail sentence: two years for the home invasion offences, plus three and one-half years for the gun trafficking and three and one-half years for the drug trafficking, concurrent to each other but consecutive to the two years for the home invasion.
 
 In the seminal case of R. v. Anthony-Cook, 2016 SCC 43, the court ruled that a trial judge should not depart from a joint submission on sentence unless the proposed sentence would bring the administration of justice into disrepute or would otherwise be contrary to the public interest.
 
 Based on my analysis below, I am not going to depart from the joint submission of five and one-half years jail. This jail sentence does not bring the administration of justice into disrepute nor does it offend the public interest. The three and one-half year sentences for the gun and trafficking offences, concurrent to each other, are well within the ranges set out in case law. The two-year sentence for the home invasion is on the very low end of the range, but there are strong mitigating factors and the totality principle to justify the position. Home Invasion Offences - Information 93480
 
 Mr. Pelly has pled guilty to the offences of break and enter to a dwelling house (s. 348(1)(d)), robbery (s. 344(1)(b)) and use of an imitation firearm in the commission of the offence of robbery (s. 85(2)). These offences constitute the home invasion on January 18, 2018. As stated above, this was a harrowing incident for a father and son who had a legal and licenced marihuana operation on their property.
 
 The home invasion features the following aggravating factors: 1.
 Mr. Pelly knew the home was occupied, a statutory aggravating factor under s. 348.1 of the Criminal Code; 2.
 Although Mr. Pelly was not the operating mind, the home invasion was a planned endeavour involving several perpetrators. Mr. Pelly kicked in the door, rounded up the son by gunpoint, and stole cash from Mr. Lecy; 3.
 Mr. Pelly was armed with at least an imitation firearm, which carries with it an implied threat of violence; 4.
 Mr. Pelly was masked; 5.
 Mr. Pelly forcibly confined the two victims; 6.
 One of the victims was a minor, an aggravating factor under s.718.2(a)(ii) of the Criminal Code.
 
 The mitigating factors apply to this home invasion and all other convictions: 1.
 Mr. Pelly is a youthful offender; 2.
 He has no criminal record; 3.
 He had a difficult upbringing and has some mental health concerns; 4.
 He struggled with a longstanding drug addiction that contributed to his offending; 5.
 Most significantly, he entered guilty pleas at an early stage, saving the victims and the public from the time and expense of perhaps several complex trials. The trials would undoubtedly have addressed the undercover operation and the search warrant; 6.
 He has completed an impressive list of courses and programs while in custody; 7.
 He has strong family support; 8.
 His remorse.
 
 The home invasion sentencing cases are very fact specific, but deterrence and denunciation come to the forefront. The appropriate range for home invasion offences involving some form of firearm range from seven years on the high end (R. v. Ertmoed, 2016 BCSC 344), four to five years in the mid-range (R. v. Dukeshire et al, 1999 BCCA 484) and two years on the most lenient end (R. v. Eakins, 2016 BCCA 194). The mandatory minimum of one year for an offence with a firearm or imitation firearm under s. 85(3) has been repealed under Bill C-5.
 
 Given the aggravating and mitigating factors here, and the totality principle, the joint submission for a two-year jail sentence is on the very low end of the range but is acceptable. With the operation of s. 85(4), a one-year jail sentence will be concurrent on each of Counts 1 and 2, and one year jail will be consecutive on Count 6.
 
 Under the joint submission, I take into account the totality principle and the fact that Mr. Pelly will be serving at least another three and one-half years for the firearms and drug trafficking offences under the same file. Firearms Trafficking Offences – Information 93480
 
 During the undercover operation, Mr. Pelly gave or sold three prohibited or restricted firearms to undercover officers. These offences are all contrary to s. 99(1)(a) of the Criminal Code and carry a mandatory minimum sentence of three years. Bill C-5 did not repeal this mandatory minimum, but the joint submission is for a higher jail sentence in any event.
 
 The aggravating factors specific to the firearms trafficking counts are: 1.
 There were three separate transactions; 2.
 The handguns were either loaded or came with loaded magazines; 3.
 Mr. Pelly believed he was providing the firearms to persons involved in the drug trade or underworld activity; 4.
 Mr. Pelly profited from this gun trafficking, either by a direct sale or as part of a bargain to sell more drugs. However, any profits were likely spent on his drug addiction.
 
 The same mitigating factors apply as above, including: Mr. Pelly’s age, lack of a record, difficult upbringing, drug addiction, guilty plea, and progress while in custody. Defence counsel emphasizes that this gun trafficking was done to feed Mr. Pelly’s drug habit.
 
 In R. v. Boesel, 2017 BCSC 970, the court cited with approval comments from R. v. Martin (24 January 2014), Brantford Court File CR-10-96 (Ont. S.C.J.) regarding the seriousness of these firearm trafficking offences: …A prohibition against gun trafficking is a necessary adjunct to gun control. It is at its worst, a means by which those inclined to commit crime acquire a weapon that significantly alters the power balance of any proposed or actual victims. In a way, it’s one of the highest forms of moral abrogation in that the offender is facilitating the acquisition of a weapon without knowing what the weapon is going to be used for, but to some extent, we have to impute to the accused a knowledge that the acquisition by the other person is for no good purpose…
 
 The Boesel case reviewed sentencing cases involving firearm trafficking and the general range is three to seven years. Again, given the mitigating factors and the joint submission that the total sentence under this information ought to be five and one-half years, a three and one-half year jail sentence is appropriate. Trafficking in Fentanyl - Information 93480
 
 In nine separate transactions over three months, Mr. Pelly trafficked 943 grams of fentanyl at a wholesale level to undercover officers for a combined price of $82,000.
 
 The street value was between $140,250 and $149,600.
 
 This offence is contrary to s.5(1) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, and the mandatory minimums have been repealed under Bill C-5.
 
 The aggravating factors specific to the drug trafficking are: 1.
 Mr. Pelly’s trafficking was part of an ongoing criminal enterprise; 2.
 Mr. Pelly was a mid-level drug dealer, and he had at least one person selling drugs under him. Defence counsel argues that Mr. Pelly was at the low end of mid level dealing, but $82,000 is no small sum. Again, much of Mr. Pelly’s profit likely was spent on his addiction; 3.
 Mr. Pelly knew he was trafficking in fentanyl and it was of relatively high potency.
 
 The same mitigating factors apply as in the gun trafficking counts, and Mr. Pelly was selling drugs at least in part to feed his own habit.
 
 Our Court of Appeal in R. v. Gill, 2022 BCCA 127 at para. 22 said that: There is no question that the moral culpability of offenders who traffic in fentanyl and its analogue, carfentanil, is very high. This Court has recognized that general deterrence and denunciation must feature prominently in such cases in light of the serious, unabated public health crisis caused by the street sale of drugs containing fentanyl… I have already set out the sad statistics for illicit drug toxicity deaths in our province.
 
 In R. v. Toth, 2017 BCSC 501, the court concluded that for a serious, sustained, and relatively sophisticated mid-level operation, where a supplier is supplying to street-level dealers, the range is between 28 months and seven years imprisonment.
 
 Taking into account the mitigating factors such as Mr. Pelly’s young age, lack of record, and guilty plea, a jail sentence of three and one-half years for the drug trafficking is appropriate.
 
 Using the totality principle, counsel have agreed that the gun and drug trafficking sentences of three and one-half years should be concurrent to each other but consecutive to the home invasion offences. The authorities demonstrate that both consecutive and concurrent sentences have been imposed for offenders facing both drug and weapon offences (see R. v. Lee, 2018 BCCA 428). There is no question that the home invasion was entirely distinct in time and nature from the later trafficking offences which occurred during the undercover operation.
 
 In summary, I accede to the joint submission under Information 93480. A total jail sentence of five and one-half years is appropriate, although the sentence for the home invasion is on the low end of the range. Possession for the Purpose of Trafficking Offences – Information 90099
 
 The most contentious issue in this case is the length of the jail sentence for the two possession for the purpose of trafficking offences under Information 90099, whether that sentence ought to be concurrent or consecutive to the five and one-half year joint submission, and whether those offences should increase the five and one-half year sentence taking into account the totality principle.
 
 The Federal Crown contends that a three and one-half year jail sentence is appropriate, and it should be consecutive to any other sentence, meaning Mr. Pelly should face a nine-year total jail sentence.
 
 Defence counsel argues that such a jail sentence is too high and it ought to be concurrent, meaning Mr. Pelly should face a total five and one-half year jail sentence. Defence counsel submits that a nine year sentence is simply too punitive for a young man with no prior record and who is turning his life around. Defence counsel suggests that two or two and one-half years jail is appropriate for Information 90099, but concurrent to the other five and one-half year sentence. A.
Range of sentence for Information 90099
 
 What is the sentence range for the two possession for the purpose of trafficking offences in July of 2018? As stated in R. v. Toth above, for a relatively sophisticated mid-level operation, where a supplier is supplying to street-level dealers, the range is between 28 months and seven years imprisonment. As stated in R. v. Gill above, the moral culpability for those who traffic in fentanyl is very high. Mr. Gill received a four-year sentence for trafficking less than 20 grams of fentanyl to undercover officers on two occasions. He was 19 without a record.
 
 One must remember that the sentencing range of 18 to 36 months set out in R. v. Smith, 2017 BCCA 112 focussed on first-time street level traffickers of fentanyl, not mid-level dealers. That said, defence counsel has provided a number of cases where offenders committed more than one trafficking type of offence and received jail sentences just under two years (R. v. Riera, 2019 BCPC 36 and R. v. Mani, 2018 BCPC 100).
 
 The aggravating factors under Information 90099 are somewhat similar to those in the later trafficking offences under Information 93480: it was a drug operation out of Mr. Pelly’s home and not a one time incident; he was a mid level dealer, albeit at the lower range given the smaller amounts; and he must have known some of the drugs he was selling contained potentially harmful fentanyl. The mitigating factors again include his young age and lack of record, his difficult upbringing, the guilty pleas and remorse, his drug addiction and his great progress while in custody.
 
 I am more inclined to accept defence counsel’s upper range of two and one-half years for the two possession for the purpose of trafficking offences in July of 2018. These offences suggest Mr. Pelly was a mid-level dealer operating out of his home, but they were not nearly as serious as his trafficking in 2019, for which he will receive a three and one-half year jail sentence. In July of 2018, the total street value of the illegal drugs was just over $10,000; in 2019, Mr. Pelly sold $82,000 worth of fentanyl with a street value of over $140,000.
 
 By no means am I diminishing the possession for the purpose of trafficking offences in 2018. Three types of drugs were involved and they were being sold to real people who could then die from drug toxicity. At least the 2019 drug deals involved undercover officers who took the dangerous fentanyl off the street. B.
Concurrent vs. Consecutive
 
 The Federal Crown submits that the jail sentence for the possession for the purpose of trafficking offences under Information 90099 should be consecutive to the joint submission of five and one-half years jail under Information 93480. Conversely, defence counsel seeks that the jail sentence under Information 90099 be concurrent to the trafficking offences under Information 93480, or that the overall sentence be five and one-half years applying the totality principle.
 
 Our Court of Appeal in Lee, cited above, confirmed that the test for imposing a consecutive or concurrent sentence is whether the acts constituting the offence were part of a linked series of acts within a single endeavour (see s.718.3(4)(b) of the Criminal Code). It is a matter within the discretion of the sentencing judge, having regard to the sentencing principles such as totality, proportionality, circumstances of the offence and the culpability of the offender.
 
 I have decided that the jail sentence for the two possession for the purpose of trafficking offences under Information 90099 must be consecutive to the other trafficking offences under Information 93480 and any other sentence. The offences under 90099 happened in July of 2018, much earlier in time than the 93480 trafficking in the latter part of 2019. The earlier offences arose out of a home operation, and although there was a supplier and individual buyers, relatively small amounts were involved. The later trafficking was almost always at wholesale levels to a perceived underworld organization.
 
 The offences under Information 90099 cannot be linked as a single endeavour with the different and more serious trafficking which occurred much later under Information 93480. The files are distinct. Moreover, the potential victims were different. Under 90099, the proposed buyers were individuals like the woman asking for 50 down. Under 93480, large amounts of fentanyl were being sold to purported gangsters for distribution down the line.
 
 I realize Mr. Pelly was probably carrying out all these crimes to feed a drug habit, but that does not make the crimes a single endeavour. This mitigating factor may be considered under the totality principle.
 
 Although the jail sentence under Information 90099 must be consecutive to any other sentence, I still must apply the totality principle below. OVERALL SENTENCE AND THE TOTALITY PRINCIPLE
 
 Section 718.2 of the Criminal Code states “where consecutive sentences are imposed, the combined sentence should not be unduly long or harsh.” Totality serves the principles of restraint and proportionality and offers one last check to ensure the overall sentence is not unduly harsh or disproportionate.
The first aspect of totality requires that the total sentence imposed be reasonably proportional to the offender’s criminality or culpability, taking into account the circumstances of each offence and the personal circumstances of the offender. The second aspect prevents the courts from imposing a total sentence that exceeds the principle of proportionality or discourages attempts at rehabilitation.
A two-step procedure for totality has been endorsed in BC (R. v. Au, 2006 BCCA 533). First, determine the appropriate sentence for each distinct offence, including whether it should be served consecutively. Secondly, take a last look to ensure the total sentence is just and appropriate.
I have accepted the joint submission of five and one-half years total jail for the home invasion and gun and drug trafficking offences under Information 93480. Two years attaches to the home invasion and three and one-half years attaches to the gun trafficking and drug trafficking, concurrent to each other but consecutive to the home invasion.
In isolation, the sentence for the possession for the purpose of trafficking offences under Information 90099 should be two and one-half years. However, a total sentence of eight years is too harsh for Mr. Pelly, a young man who is trying to turn his life around and who has already begun his rehabilitation journey. I accept that he was addicted when these crimes occurred. The sentence here will be long but it ought not crush his spirit.
That said, a five and one-half year global sentence is too low a global sentence for a man who regularly engaged in drug trafficking with dangerous consequences to the Abbotsford community. Overall, a stern message must be sent that if you engage in drug trafficking, especially trafficking of fentanyl, there will be significant consequences.
I take one last look at the seriousness of all these offences and the effect they have had on the general community as well as the Lecy family, while recognizing the mitigating factors such as the guilty plea, Mr. Pelly’s young age, his former addiction and his considerable progress while in custody.
Taking into account all the above analysis and the totality principle, the total jail sentence is reduced to seven years. The jail sentence under Information 90099 will be reduced to 18 months consecutive to the five and one-half month joint submission.
Mr. Pelly has time served of 590 actual days, which equates to 885 days of enhanced credit. This amounts to over two years and five months of enhanced credit. Even though Mr. Pelly’s pre-trial custody was at times difficult due to COVID-19 lockdowns and other factors, there is no basis to depart from the 1.5 to 1 enhanced credit prescribed in s. 719(3.1) of the Criminal Code. There is no such thing as COVID-19 credit in BC (R. v. Costello, 2020 BCSC 1206). SENTENCE
Mr. Pelly please stand up. The net effect of the jail sentence I am imposing is seven years jail less enhanced time served of 885 days. You will have 1,122 days, or just over 37 months, remaining to serve on Information 93480, and another eighteen months to serve on Information 90099.
Under file 93480, your jail sentence is as follows: Home Invasion Count 1, the break and enter: one year or 365 days, less enhanced credit of 365 days, concurrent to Count 2 but consecutive to all other sentences; Count 2, the robbery: one year or 365 days, less enhanced credit of 365 days, concurrent to Count 1 but consecutive to all other sentences; Count 6, the robbery using firearm: one year or 365 days, less enhanced credit of 365 days, consecutive to all other sentences. Firearms and Drug Trafficking Count 7, transfer of Raven Arms pistol: three and one-half years or 1,277 days, less enhanced credit of 155 days, leaves 1,122 days jail remaining, concurrent to Counts 9, 11 and 13 but consecutive to any other sentences; Count 9, transfer of Smith & Wesson pistol: three and one-half years or 1,277 days, less enhanced credit of 155 days, leaves 1,122 days jail remaining, concurrent to Counts 7, 11 and 13 but consecutive to any other sentences; Count 11, transfer of Colt pistol: three and one half years or 1,277 days, less enhanced credit of 155 days, leaves 1,122 days jail remaining, concurrent to Counts 7, 9 and 13, but consecutive to all other sentences; Count 13, Drug trafficking: three and one half years or 1,277 days, less enhanced credit of 155 days, leaves 1,122 days remaining, concurrent to Counts 7, 9, and 11, but consecutive to all other sentences.
Under file 90099, your jail sentence is as follows: Count 2, PPT heroin/fentanyl: eighteen months, concurrent to Count 3, but consecutive to all other sentences; Count 3, PPT fentanyl/cocaine: eighteen months, concurrent to Count 2, but consecutive to all other sentences. Ancillary Orders
For all nine counts under both files, a mandatory firearms prohibition will be imposed under s.109 for life, under both Parts (a) and (b).
Count 1 under Information 93480 is a primary designated offence. Pursuant to s. 487.051(1), a DNA sample will be taken from you for inclusion in the National DNA databank.
All other Counts on both files are secondary designated offences. I am satisfied that pursuant to s. 487.051(3), a DNA sample will be taken from you for inclusion in the DNA databank.
Under Counts 1, 2 and 6 of Information 93840, you will have no communication with Shawn Lecy or his son during your term of imprisonment, pursuant to s. 743.21.
There shall be a forfeiture of all exhibits.
All victim fine surcharges are waived on all counts.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/pc/2023bcpc12.html
 


On August 11, 2022, after a two day trial, I convicted L.A. of the following three offences charged on Information 5245-1 committed on January 15, 2021, in Prince George, British Columbia: 
a.
 assaulting [D.A.] with a weapon (a knife) contrary to s. 267(a) of the Criminal Code; 
b.
 unlawfully causing bodily harm to [D.A.] contrary to s. 269 of the Criminal Code; and 
c.

possessing a weapon (a knife) for a dangerous purpose contrary to s. 88(1) of the Criminal Code. 
 


We are before the court today to sentence L.A. for these offences.
 


The Supreme Court of Canada recognizes that sentencing any offender is a difficult art involving innumerable factors. Sentencing young offenders is even more daunting because typically they are adolescents in the throes of significant and rapid physiological, psychological, and emotional development. Hence, at sentencing, the Court is often dealing with an individual who is markedly changed from the one who committed the offence. 
Circumstances of the offence
 


The circumstances of the offence are set out in my Reasons for Judgment are indexed as R. v. L.A., 2022 BCPC 163 (CanLII).
 


On January 15, 2021, D.A. was in Grade 10 and two days shy of his sixteenth birthday. On that day he was hanging out with four other youths, T.S., J.P., R.A., and L.A. At the time of the offence, T.S. was 14 years old and in Grade 9; J.P. was 15 years old; L.A. was 13 years old, and in Grade 8. R.A. is 18 months older than L.A. R.A. was 16 years old at trial and 17 at L.A.’s sentencing.
 


In my August 11, 2022, Reasons for Judgment, I commented, “this case underscores the Supreme Court’s finding in R. v. Jobidon, 1991 CanLII 77 (SCC): there is no social utility in a fistfight.” This bears reiteration.
 


In the early evening of January 15, 2021, the five youths, D.A., T.S., J.P., R.A., and L.A., were at the Pine Centre Mall and McDonald’s on Massey Drive, in Prince George, BC. At approximately 9:00 p.m., they decided to head home. Their route home took the youths on a trail in Carrie Jane Gray Park behind the YMCA and baseball diamonds. It was dark and the only lighting was peripheral from distant streetlights. 
 


The youth stopped on the trail briefly so T.S. could go to the bathroom. During this hiatus, L.A. and D.A. began to play wrestle, which resulted in D.A. being stabbed and L.A. being charged and ultimately convicted of the offences for which he is now before the court for sentencing. 
 


L.A., now 15 years old, is before me for sentencing under the Youth Criminal Justice Act. L.A. has never denied stabbing D.A. His defence was that of accident and self-defence. L.A. had never denied possessing a knife, but rather, he denied possessing it for “a purpose dangerous to the public peace.”
 
 At the time of the offence, and then at trial, and again at sentencing, L.A. expressed extreme remorse for injuring D.A. in the manner he did. 
Submissions and exhibits
 
 This matter came before me for sentencing in today in Prince George Provincial Court, on January 11, 2023. I heard submissions from the Crown and Defence and I received into evidence the following exhibits: Exhibit 1: A Pre-Sentence Report of Youth Probation Officer, Melissa Lawrence, dated September 15, 2022, and filed with the Court on October 7, 2022; Exhibit 2: A Psychosocial report of Katrina Ludwig, Psychiatric Social Worker (“PSW”) of Youth Forensic Psychiatric Services, dated September 15, 2022, and filed October 13, 2022; and 
Exhibit 3: The Psychological Assessment Report of Dr. Noa Schwartz, a Registered Psychologist of Youth Forensic Psychiatric Services, dated October 5, 2022, and filed October 13, 2022. Objectives of the YCJA
 
 L.A. was 13 years old when he committed the offence for which he is being sentenced and thus is a “young person” as defined by the Youth Criminal Justice Act, SC 2002, c 1, (the “YCJA”). The YCJA sets out a sentencing regime completely different from that established under the Criminal Code. The predominant principles of sentencing and the available sentence ranges are dramatically different for youths and adults. With the enactment of the YCJA, Parliament created a separate criminal justice system for young persons in recognition of their presumed diminished moral blameworthiness and heightened vulnerability in dealing with the justice system: see R. v. D.B., 2008 SCC 25, para. 41; R. v. S.J.L., 2009 SCC 14 (CanLII).
 
 The YCJA holds that the youth criminal justice system “is intended to protect the public by holding young persons accountable through measures that are proportionate to the seriousness of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the young person” by “promoting the rehabilitation and reintegration of young persons who have committed offences”: YCJA, s. 3(1)(a). Thus the appropriate sentencing principles under the YCJA are accountability, proportionality, rehabilitation and reintegration: YCJA, s. 3(1)(b).
 

Section 3(1)(c) of the YCJA states: (c)

 within the limits of fair and proportionate accountability, the measures taken against young persons who commit offences should












 
i.

 
reinforce respect for societal values,











 
ii.

 
encourage the repair of harm done to victims and the community,











 
iii.

 
be meaningful for the individual young person given his or her needs and level of development and, where appropriate, involve the parents, the extended family, the community and social or other agencies in the young person’s rehabilitation and reintegration, and











 
iv.

 
respect gender, ethnic, cultural and linguistic differences and respond to the needs of aboriginal young persons and of young persons with special requirements . . . Purpose of sentencing under the YCJA
 

Section 38(1) of the YCJA states the purpose of youth sentences is to hold young persons accountable through just sanctions that ensure meaningful consequences for them and promote their rehabilitation and reintegration into society, thereby contributing to the long-term protection of the public. Principles of YCJA sentencing
 

Section 38(2) of the YCJA specifies that: (a)

 the sentence must not result in a punishment that is greater than the punishment that would be appropriate for an adult who has been convicted of the same offence committed in similar circumstances; (b)

 the sentence must be similar to the sentences imposed in the region on similar young persons found guilty of the same offence committed in similar circumstances; (c)

 the sentence must be proportionate to the seriousness of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the young person for that offence; (d)

 all available sanctions other than custody that are reasonable in the circumstances should be considered for all young persons, with particular attention to the circumstances of aboriginal young persons; (e)

 subject to paragraph (c), the sentence must

(i) be the least restrictive sentence that is capable of achieving the purpose set out in subsection (1),
(ii) be the one that is most likely to rehabilitate the young person and reintegrate him or her into society, and
(iii) promote a sense of responsibility in the young person, and an acknowledgement of the harm done to victims and the community; 
(e.1) if this Act provides that a youth justice court may impose conditions as part of the sentence, a condition may be imposed only if
(i) the imposition of the condition is necessary to achieve the purpose set out in subsection 38(1),
(ii) the young person will reasonably be able to comply with the condition, and 
(iii) the condition is not used as a substitute for appropriate child protection, mental health or other social measures; and
(f) subject to paragraph (c), the sentence may have the following objectives:
(i) to denounce unlawful conduct, and 
(ii) to deter the young person from committing offences.
 
The YCJA is clear that rehabilitative measures intended to address problems that appear to have caused the young person to commit an offence must not result in a sentence that is disproportionate to the seriousness of the offence committed. The Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. B.W.P. R. v. B.V.N., 2006 SCC 27 (CanLII), commented the protection of the public is a long-term outcome of a successful youth sentence. Factors to be considered
 

Section 38(3) of the YCJA requires a youth court judge to consider a number of specific factors in in determining an appropriate sentence, including: a.
 the degree of participation by the young person in the commission of the offence; b.
 the harm done to victims and whether it was intentional or reasonably foreseeable; c.
 any reparation made by the young person to the victim or the community; d.
 the time spent in detention by the young person as a result of the offence; e.
 the previous findings of guilt of the young person; and f.
 
any other aggravating and mitigating circumstances related to the young person or the offence that are relevant to the purpose and principles set out in this section. Sentencing options
 

Section 42(2) of the YCJA provides the court with a list of sentencing options in escalating intrusiveness. These options range from a reprimand in the least serious cases to an intensive rehabilitative custody and supervision in the most serious violent offences. The options are not mutually exclusive. A court can impose any one or more of the sentences that are not inconsistent with one another: s. 42(2). Section 42(14) of the YCJA provides that for most offences, the maximum combined duration of sentences is two years (unless it is one of the serious offences for which an adult could receive a sentence of life imprisonment, in which case the maximum custodial sentence in youth justice court is three years). Custodial sentences for young offenders
 
 The preamble to the YCJA expresses the need to discourage incarceration as a criminal penalty for non-violent young persons. Although, s. 39(1) limits the use of custodial sentences, they are available where the young person has committed a violent offence. A violent offence as defined in s. 2 of the YCJA includes one that causes bodily harm. Position of the parties
 

The Crown seeks a four month deferred custody and supervision order (“DCSO”) followed by 12 months’ probation, and some ancillary on the following terms and conditions: 
DCSO L.A. must: a.
 report to the Youth Probation Officer as directed; b.
 reside where directed and obey the house rules; c.
 regularly attend school; d.
 abide by a condition of house arrest with exceptions for attending school, extracurricular activities, employment, medical emergencies, counselling, or with the written permission of the Youth Probation Officer, preapproved in advance; 
e.

attend counselling as directed by the Youth Probation Worker for anger management, psychiatric and psychological health; L.A. must not: f.
 contact D.A. or go anywhere D.A. may be except:












 
i.

 
for the purposes of providing an apology in a manner directed by his Youth Probation Officer; or











 
ii.

 
for the purposes of engaging in a restorative justice conferencing program to satisfaction of youth worker











 
iii.

 
D.A. consents to the contact; g.
 possess any knives with the exception for employment and eating food; h.

possess any weapons as defined in the Criminal Code; Probation: 12 months i.
 
L.A. will be on probation for 12 months’ on the same terms as the DCSO, except the house arrest provision will be substituted for a curfew from 8 p.m. until 6 a.m. each day with the same exceptions. Ancillary orders j.

the knife seized by the RCMP in their investigation of this matter will forfeit to the Crown; k.
 as the offences under s. 269 and 267(a) are primary designated offences, a DNA Order; l.

a stand alone weapons prohibition; and m. 
an order that all reports filed as exhibits in this sentencing proceedings be sent to the Youth Probation Officer for the purposes of assisting with case management. Defence Position
 
 The defence sees a Conditional Discharge with six to eight months’ probation, which will include: a.
 counselling through the Youth Probation Officer; b.
 a prohibition against L.A. possessing, knives or weapons; c.
 a prohibition against L.A. having any contact with D.A., or going to D.A.’s residence, school or workplace, with the exception:












 
i.

 
that he can attend at D.A.’s school for the purposes of engaging in extra curricular activities, such as football games; and











 
ii.

 
to provide an apology as directed by his Youth Probation Officer.
 
 The defence does not oppose the ancillary orders the Crown seeks. Sentencing options under the YCJA
 

The sentencing options available to the Youth Justice Court are set out in s. 42 (2) of the YCJA, which state, in relevant part: Youth sentence 42 (2) When a youth justice court finds a young person guilty of an offence and is imposing a youth sentence, the court shall, subject to this section, impose any one of the following sanctions or any number of them that are not inconsistent with each other and, if the offence is first degree murder or second degree murder within the meaning of section 231 of the Criminal Code, the court shall impose a sanction set out in paragraph (q) or subparagraph (r)(ii) or (iii) and may impose any other of the sanctions set out in this subsection that the court considers appropriate: .
. . (c)

 by order direct that the young person be discharged on any conditions imposed by the court in accordance with paragraph 38(2)(e.1) and may require the young person to report to and be supervised by the provincial director; . . . (k)

 place the young person on probation in accordance with sections 55 and 56 (conditions and other matters related to probation orders) for a specified period not exceeding two years;
 . . . (p)

 subject to subsection (5), make a deferred custody and supervision order that is for a specified period not exceeding six months, subject to the conditions set out in subsection 105(2), and to any conditions set out in subsection 105(3) that the court considers appropriate.
 
 Sections 55 and 56 of the YCJA state: Condition that must appear in orders 55 (1) The youth justice court shall prescribe, as a condition of an order made under paragraph 42(2)(k) or (l), that the young person appear before the youth justice court when required by the court to do so. Conditions that may appear in orders (2)

 A youth justice court may, in accordance with paragraph 38(2)(e.1), prescribe as conditions of an order made under paragraph 42(2)(k) or (l) that a young person do one or more of the following: (a)

 report to and be supervised by the provincial director or a person designated by the youth justice court; (b)

 notify the clerk of the youth justice court, the provincial director or the youth worker assigned to the case of any change of address or any change in the young person’s place of employment, education or training; (c)

 remain within the territorial jurisdiction of one or more courts named in the order; (d)

 make reasonable efforts to obtain and maintain suitable employment; (e)

 attend school or any other place of learning, training or recreation that is appropriate, if the youth justice court is satisfied that a suitable program for the young person is available there; (f)

 reside with a parent, or any other adult that the youth justice court considers appropriate, who is willing to provide for the care and maintenance of the young person; (g)

 reside at a place that the provincial director may specify; (h)

 comply with any other conditions set out in the order that the youth justice court considers appropriate; and
 
(i) not own, possess or have the control of any weapon, ammunition, prohibited ammunition, prohibited device or explosive substance, except as authorized by the order. Communication of order 56 (1) A youth justice court that makes an order under paragraph 42(2)(k) or (l) shall (a)

 cause the order to be read by or to the young person bound by it; (b)

 explain or cause to be explained to the young person the purpose and effect of the order, and confirm that the young person understands it; and (c)

 cause a copy of the order to be given to the young person, and to any parent of the young person who is in attendance at the sentencing hearing.
 

A DCSO is similar to a conditional sentence under s. 742.1 of the Criminal Code of Canada. It is imposed when the Crown has made out the criteria for the imposition of a custodial sentence. The youth is permitted to remain in the community for the duration of the DCSO, subject to supervision by probation officers. The maximum length is six months. If the young person breaches the terms of DCSO, the youth court can order they serve the remainder as if it were a custody and supervision sentence pursuant to s. 109(2)(c) and s. 42(2)(n) of the YCJA. DCSO is sometimes considered a “last chance” sanction before actual committal custody. 
 

Section 42(5) of the YCJA provides that a DCSO is available only if “the young person is found guilty of an offence other than one in the commission of which a young person causes or attempts to cause serious bodily harm.” Serious bodily harm can include either physical or psychological harm. 
Sentencing authorities
 
 The Crown has provided the Court with to cases: R. v. K.T.W., 2012 BCPC 52, and R. v. K.S.V., 2015 SKPC 35.
 
 K.T.W. is a decision of Judge C. Baird Ellan of the BC Provincial Court wherein she describes a DCSO sentence as follows:
 
The sentence proposed is not a jail sentence, but it is the next most severe option under the Act. It requires that the Court find that the young person is eligible for custody, under section 39. Our Court of Appeal has referred to a deferred custody order as a custody order, presumably in light of the significant restrictions and consequences attached to such orders: R v. R.C.W.M., supra.
 
 K.T.W. predates the 2012 amendments to the YCJA under the Bill C-10: Safe Streets and Communities Act, S.C. 2012, c. 1 (“SSCA”), which came into force on October 23, 2012. With the SSCA Parliament expanded the definition of “violent offence” set out in s. 2(1) of the YCJA to include offences that could endanger the life or safety of another person by creating a substantial likelihood of causing bodily harm. This broader definition was intended to increase the range of offences that will be eligible for a custodial sentence under this section of the YCJA. Prior to the enactment of the SSCA, a DCSO was unavailable for a “serious violent offence,” which meant “an offence in the commission of which a young person causes or attempts to cause serious bodily harm.”
 
 Still, K.T.W. is a case where the Youth Court Judge imposed a DCSO on a young person who pled guilty to using a knife to cause serious injury to two individuals during an altercation. 
 
 In K.S.V. the young person entered guilty pleas to one count of robbery (s. 344 of the Criminal Code) and one count of having her face masked with intent to commit an indictable offence (s. 351(2) of the Criminal Code). K.S.V. went into a grocery store with three other young offenders and one adult, with their faces mostly covered. The adult co-accused held an imitation BB gun to the head of the clerk and threatened him. The group robbed the store of cash and various other items. K.S.V., then 16 years old, took only some cookies and a drink. K.S.V. did not have a criminal record; she had always attended school and was a good student. Her family was strong and supportive. K.S.V. had been compliant while on her undertaking since the offence. The victim suffered ongoing fear and anxiety, especially when he had to work alone.
 
 The Youth Court sentenced K.S.V. to a three-month open custody and supervision order followed by 18 months’ probation, subject to multiple conditions. The sentencing judge noted that under the YCJA, the proportionality principle had primacy. In this case, although K.S.V. was not the ringleader, she was responsible in that she knew what was going to happen and was an active participant in the offence. The court took into account that K.S.V. had confessed, been cooperative with the police and had identified the other perpetrators and that she had complied with her previous court order. 
 

The Crown tendered this case primarily its discussion about whether K.S.V. would have been eligible for a deferred custody and supervision order. It followed the enactment of the SSCA, which precluded the use of a DCSO if the young person if found guilty of an offence, in the commission of which, the young offender caused or attempted to cause serious bodily harm. R. v. McCraw, 1991 CanLII 29 (SCC), the Supreme Court held that “serious bodily harm” could include a psychological injury that interfered with the integrity, health, or well-being of a victim. This definition has been applied in a number of sentencing decisions under the YCJA: see: R. v. C.Z., 2021 BCPC 25, at para. 34, citing R. v. BS, 2017 MBCA 102.
 

The Crown points to those sections of K.S.V., where Judge Anand considers the availability of a DCSO for robbery. Specifically, the Crown points to: a.
 a DCSO is only available if a custodial sentence could be imposed under s. 39(1) of the YCJA (para. 25); b.
 the offence committed by K.S.V. (a masked robbery with an imitation firearm) satisfied the definition of a “violent offence” as set out para. 2 of the YCJA as it included the element of bodily harm (para. 25); c.
 where the index offence (robbery) constituted a violent offence allowing for a custodial sentence, which included a DCSO, a DCSO may still be precluded pursuant to s. 42(5)(a) of the YCJA, if in committing the offence the young offender caused or attempted to cause the victim “serious bodily harm” (para. 26); d.
 in K.S.V., the court had evidence the offence caused the victim “psychological hurt or injury that interferes in a substantial way with the victim’s psychological integrity, health or well-being” (para. 28); e.
 in K.S.V., the Crown failed to satisfy the Court beyond a reasonable doubt K.S.V. intended to cause the victim serious psychological harm (paras. 29-30). The court did, however, find the psychological harm was reasonably foreseeable in the circumstances of that case (para. 30); f.
 at para. 31 in K.S.V., Judge Anand when on to state: Simply because custody could be ordered in relation to a young person and a deferred custody and supervision order is precluded from being made, it does not mean that the youth justice court necessarily should impose a custody and supervision order. Indeed, s.39 (2) of the YCJA states that even when the gateway to custody is open, a custodial sentence shall not be imposed unless the court has considered all alternatives to custody that are reasonable in the circumstances and unless the court has determined that there is not a reasonable alternative, or combination of alternatives, that is in accordance with the purpose and principles set out in s.38. Thus defence counsel’s submission that the appropriate sentence for K.S.V. consists of a probation order may be found to have merit if the resulting sentence is in accordance with the purpose and principles set out in s.38.
 
 Judge Anand determined the K.S.V.’s case called for the imposition of a custody and supervision order because the alternatives were not reasonable or adequate to hold the young offender accountable for the offences nor would they would have meaningful consequences for K.S.V. In the context of the crimes committed. Judge Anand sentenced K.S.V. to an additional three month open custody and supervision order followed by 18 months’ probation. 
Defence authorities
 
 Counsel for L.A. provided the court with the following authorities: (a) R. v. Kibangula, 2021 BCSC 1431 (“Kibangula”); (b) R. v. Manahan, 2018 BCPC 332 (“Manahan”) ; (c) R. v. Smith, 2018 BCPC 266 (“Smith”) .
 
 In Kibangula, Justice Mayer of the B.C. Supreme Court, allowed the offender’s appeal of a suspended sentence with two years’ probation imposed by the sentencing judge. Mr. Kibangula was 25 years old. He pled guilty to assault causing bodily harm for delivering a “sucker punch” to the victim’s face, meaning Mr. Kibangula struck the victim while the victim was not looking. The victim fell into a glass gate and required plastic surgery to repair the injuries to his face. The appellate judge admitted evidence of the offender’s post-sentencing rehabilitation. Justice Mayer substituted a conditional discharge for the suspended sentence imposed by the Provincial Court. Applying the test set out in R. v. Fallofield, 1973 CanLII 1412 (BC CA), Justice Mayer concluded a conditional discharge was in the best interests of the accused and not contrary to the public interest. At para. 22, the Court considered the five sentencing authorities wherein the sentencing judge had imposed a conditional discharge. These authorities include Smith and Manahan, upon which the defence in this case also relies. In Kibangula, Justice Mayer also considered the case of: a.
 R. v. Harper, 2020 BCPC 226, wherein the offender pled guilty to assault causing bodily harm. Mr. Harper “sucker punched” the victim in the back of the head causing him to fall to the ground where victim was then fatally stabbed by another person. Mr. Harper was a 25-year-old first offender of Indigenous heritage. Judge Bahen granted him a conditional discharge with 24 months probation; and b.
 R. v. Miletic, 2020 BCPC 154, in which Judge Sudeyko convicted Mr. Miletic of assault causing bodily harm after a trial. Mr. Miletic was found to have sucker punched another player during an amateur soccer game. He broke the victim’s orbital bone and caused the victim to suffer the ongoing negative effects of post-concussion syndrome. Judge Sudeyko described the offence as “cowardly and serious.” Mr. Miletic was 44 years old, had no criminal record, and had lived a pro-social lifestyle. The Crown sought a suspended sentence with 18 months probation and 50 hours community work service. Despite Mr. Miletic’s lack of remorse, Judge Sudeyko granted him a conditional discharge with 12 months probation. 
c.
 I note that Miletic was recently referenced in R. v. Hambleton, 2021 BCPC 130 (CanLII), a decision of Judge Brecknell of the Prince George Provincial Court. On January 26, 2021, after a lengthy trial, Judge Brecknell found Mr. Hambleton guilty of the offence of assault causing bodily harm. The offender was in his middle forties at the time of the offence; he had no criminal history; he had “an excellent reputation among his family and friends for being a fair, honest, and a gentle person.” Judge Brecknell imposed a conditional discharge with nine months’ probation. d.

R. v. Sinclair, 2016 ABPC 209, wherein the Alberta Provincial Court found Mr. Sinclair guilty after trial of assault with a weapon. Judge T.C. Semenuk described the assault as “sudden and vicious.” Mr. Sinclair head-butted the victim then struck him in the face with a beer bottle. The victim suffered serious injuries including a broken nose and a broken orbital bone on the left side of his face. After the assault, the accused fled the scene with his friends. The accused was a youthful offender with no criminal record and a positive pre-sentence report. He accepted responsibility for his actions, expressed genuine remorse for his behaviour, and demonstrated insight on how his actions impacted the victim and his family. Judge. Semenuk imposed a conditional discharge with 18 months’ probation.
 

Smith is a decision of Judge J.P. MacCarthy of the British Columbia Provincial Court. Mr. Smith was 18 years old at the time of the offence. He had no criminal record. Mr. Smith left school before graduating, but had an excellent work record. He was actively engaged in hockey and other positive extra-curricular activities. Mr. Smith’s long‑term career goal was to pursue a career in the military. He was concerned that a criminal conviction may have some negative impact on this career goal. The Crown sought a suspended sentence and Mr. Smith sought a conditional discharge. The victim was 17 years old. As a result of Mr. Smith’s sucker punched to the face, the victim sustained extensive injuries to his mouth and teeth. He also sustained a concussion, facial bruising, and a laceration to his forehead. Judge MacCarthy considered as mitigating, Mr. Smith’s young age, his expressed remorse, and the fact he took responsibility for the offence. Judge MacCarthy considered aggravating, the seriousness of the physical and emotional injury to the victim and its financial consequences ($12,239.79 for dental reconstruction).
 
 At para. 38 of Smith, Judge MacCarthy discusses the availability of a conditional discharge. He states:
 
The test that is outlined in Fallofield is that the granting of a discharge must first of all be in the interests of the Accused and the second leg of the test is that it must not be contrary to the public interest. Fallofield draws the following conclusions with respect to the application of s. 730 for discharges, and they are as follows: (1)

 The section may be used in respect of any offence other than an offence for which a minimum punishment is prescribed by law or the offence is punishable by imprisonment for 14 years or for life or by death. (2)

 The section contemplates the commission of an offence. There is nothing in the language that limits it to a technical or trivial violation. (3)

 Of the two conditions precedent to the exercise of the jurisdiction, the first is that the Court must consider that it is in the best interests of the Accused that he should be discharged either absolutely or upon condition. If it is not in the best interests of the Accused, that, of course, is the end of the matter. If it is decided that it is in the best interests of the Accused, then that brings the next consideration into operation. (4)

 The second condition precedent is that the Court must consider that a grant of discharge is not contrary to the public interest. (5)

 Generally, the first condition would presuppose that the Accused is a person of good character, without previous conviction, that it is not necessary to enter a conviction against him in order to deter him from future offences or to rehabilitate him, and that the entry of a conviction against him may have significant adverse repercussions. (6)

 In the context of the second condition the public interest in the deterrence of others, while it must be given due weight, does not preclude the judicious use of the discharge provisions. (7)

 The powers given by [what is now s. 730] should not be exercised as an alternative to probation or suspended sentence. (8)

 Section [now 730] should not be applied routinely to any particular offence. This may result in an apparent lack of uniformity in the application of the discharge provisions. This lack will be more apparent than real and will stem from the differences in the circumstances of cases.
 
 In granting a conditional discharge with 24 months’ probation, Judge McCarthy gave primary consideration to Mr. Smith’s young age and lack of criminal record. 
 
 Manahan is another sentencing decision of Judge McCarthy of this Court. Mr. Manahan was charged with assault causing bodily harm. He sucker punched the victim in the face, causing him significant facial injuries requiring surgery. The victim, who worked in the pub where the assault occurred, had intervened in an attempt to resolve a high-conflict and escalating situation as a result of Mr. Manahan becoming intoxicated and abusive to other patrons. As the result of the assault, the victim sustained enduring pain and suffering. He lost three to four weeks’ time at work and his wages for that period. Mr. Manahan was 55 years old first offender and a journeyman painter. The Crown sought a suspended sentence with 12 months’ probation; the defence sought a conditional discharge.
 
 Judge McCarthy considered R. v. Jassal, 2007 BCPC 231, a decision of Judge M.R. McMillan, in which the offender was charged with assault causing bodily harm against his spouse. The assault was carried out in front their two and a half year-old daughter who repeatedly asked him to stop assaulting her mother. In Manahan, Judge McCarthy cites the following passages from Jassal:
 
The prerequisites for the imposition of a conditional sentence are set out in the case of R. v. Fallofield [citation omitted] a decision of our Court of Appeal.
 
Those principles are usefully summarized in some of the cases provided by Ms. Tiwana. They are: R. v. Saunders, B.C.J. 2887, a decision of our Court of Appeal allowing an appeal and substituting a jail sentence with a conditional discharge where the charge was assault causing bodily harm; R. v. Carroll, B.C.J. 365, a decision of our Court of Appeal, where the Court in that case reiterated the principle that the public interest in general deterrence does not preclude a discharge; R. v. Tone, B.C.J. 1688, a decision of Associate Chief Justice Dohm, where the accused pled guilty to an assault causing bodily harm and where the complainant suffered very serious injury, a conditional discharge was imposed; and R. v. Bertuzzi, 2005 CanLII 4775 (ON CA), B.C.J. No. 2692, a decision of my brother Judge Weitzel, where he imposed a conditional discharge in a case of an assault causing bodily harm in the context of a hockey game.
 
In Jassal, Judge McMillan relied on Chief Justice Dohm’s oft-cited decision of R. v. Tone, 2003 BCSC 880 (CanLII). In Tone, the offender broke into the victim's home, delivered 10 to 15 blows to the victim’ neck, head and face. The victim’s head hit an iron railing rendering him unconscious. The victim suffered significant head trauma and permanent scarring below his eye. Mr. Tone pled guilty to assault causing bodily harm. The offender expressed guilt, remorse and regret for the assault. ACJ Dohm granted Mr. Tone a conditional discharge on his completing one year probation.
 
 In Manahan, Judge MacCarthy reproduces the following passage from Tone:
 
. . . It has previously been stated that the need for general deterrence militates against the granting of a conditional discharge in almost all cases involving violence resulting in injury; see R. v. Wood (1975), 1975 CanLII 1410 (ON CA), 24 C.C.C. (2d) 79. However, conditional discharges have been granted in previous cases of assault causing bodily harm where the circumstances of the case have warranted it; see R. v. Walker, B.C.J. No. 1046 (QL) (CA); [and] R. v. Carroll.
 
 In Manahan, Judge MacCarthy considered mitigating Mr. Manahan’s remorse and the fact he accepted responsibility for the offence. Judge MacCarthy found aggravating the significant physical and emotional harm and financial consequences to the victim. Also aggravating was the fact that Mr. Manahan assaulted the victim, who was carrying out his duties as an employee of the pub were the assault occurred. 
 
 I pause to note that Manahan was cited by Judge Harris in R. v. Pacella, 2020 BCPC 236 (CanLII), wherein the accused pled guilty to assaulting three police officers. Mr. Pacella was 50 years old, had no criminal record, and lived a pro-social life style. The Crown sought a suspended sentence with 12 months’ probation. The defence sought a conditional discharge. In granting the conditional discharge, Judge Harris stated at para. 48:
 
As for whether a discharge is contrary to the public interest, I observe that discharges are available for any offence that does not have a mandatory minimum sentence. As such, a discharge is available for the offence of assaulting a police officer. I also note the public interest in deterrence and denunciation does not preclude the judicious use of the discharge provisions: Fallofield, at page 455.
 

I gleaned from noting up the defence authorities that there are shortage of cases where the court has granted a conditional discharge for serious assaults: see R. v. Li, 2019 BCSC 648, para. 28, cited in Kibangula. As discussed above, the court has granted a conditional discharge even in cases where the accused was found guilty after a trial, and for offences such as assault causing bodily harm or assault with a weapon. Also see: R. v. R.A.R., 2016 BCPC 276 (CanLII); R. v. Stard, 2016 BCPC 441; R. v. Ranspot, 2017 BCPC 101 (CanLII); R. v. Popovich, 2021 BCPC 278 (CanLII); R. v. Miller, 2015 BCSC 1052 (CanLII); R. v. Delgren, 2019 BCSC 396. Circumstances of the offender
 

L.A. is 15 years old. His circumstances and antecedents are particularized in detail in the three presentence reports marked Exhibits 1, 2, and 3 in this sentencing hearing. I have read the reports and I have listened to the Crown and defence counsel’s submissions on their content.
 

L.A. is the biological son of C.M. and K.A. He was born and raised in Prince George and resides with his parents and R.A., his older brother, R.A. is now 18 years old and L.A.’s only sibling. By all accounts L.A. is blessed with close, loving and supportive family.
 
 L.A. is of Nisga’a and Metis heritage. The Court was not provided with any Gladue report, however, I can take judicial notice the Nisga’a, are an Indigenous people of Canada. They reside in the Nass River valley of north-western British Columbia. I also know the Métis are Indigenous peoples who primarily inhabit Western Canada. Métis is used to describe communities of mixed European and Indigenous descent across Canada. The Métis originated largely in Western Canada and emerged as a political force in the 19th century, radiating outwards from the Red River Settlement in Manitoba.
 
 A fit sentence balances a number of factors personal to L.A., many of which militate toward a non-custodial sentence. These include those factors set out below. Age at the time of the offence: Generally speaking, very young offenders are considered less morally blameworthy. L.A. was only 13 at the time of the offence, which is very “young” even under the YCJA, which sentences youth between the ages of 12 and 17. At trial, I was struck at how young L.A. was at the time of the offences, not only in terms of his age, which was 13, but also by his physical, emotional and social immaturity; Age at the time of sentencing: Today, at the date of his sentencing, L.A. is 15 years old. I have no doubt that in the 24 months between the offence date and sentencing, L.A. has matured and gained some insight into his behaviour; Participation: L.A. was solely responsible for this offence. In other words, there is no suggestion the other young persons present at the time in any way instigated, assisted in, or encouraged the offence; Health: The offender’s physical, mental and emotional health is highly relevant in sentencing. L.A. suffers from anxiety, but otherwise is physically, mentally and emotionally healthy; Previous findings of guilt: L.A. is a first-time offender. He has no previous findings of guilt and there are no other outstanding matters before the court. This, however, is not surprising, give he was only 13 at the time of the offence; Indigenous heritage: L.A. is an Indigenous offender, and the principles espoused by the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Gladue, 1999 CanLII 679 (CanLII), and R. v. Ipeelee, 2012 SCC 13, (CanLII) are relevant and applicable. 
Family and community support: L.A. comes from a very close and pro-social family who have stood by him throughout this process. He has had a supportive and stable upbringing. He says his parents are the most important adults in his life; they are actively involved in his life; they provide him with support and serve as his role models. Youth Probation Worker (“YPW”) Lawrence states that L.A.’s parents are “also cooperative and supportive of L.A. in these stressful circumstances and support the Youth Justice and Court process.” 
L.A.’s family lives a prosocial lifestyle. No one in L.A.’s household abuses substances. Both his parents work full-time. K.A. has worked as a warehouseman for [omitted for publication] for over 30 years. C.M. works as a residential support worker at [omitted for publication] in Prince George. Bail (duration and conditions): L.A. was on bail since January 16, 2021. His original bail conditions (Undertaking under the YCJA) included the following conditions: a.
 L.A. was to report to the Youth Probation in Prince George, as directed; b.
 L.A. was prohibited from having any contact or communication directly or indirectly with D.A.; c.
 L.A. was prohibited was prohibited from going anywhere D.A. is expected to be; d.
 L.A. was prohibited from possessing any knives, except for eating or preparing food; and
e.
 L.A. was not to posses any weapons as defined in s. 2 of the Criminal Code. Bail (performance): L.A. performance on bail has been “very good.” He’s been compliant with his all conditions for two years. YPW Lawrence states that L.A. has been very cooperative and open with her. She says, “He is polite and pleasant at all times.” L.A. has had no subsequent involvement with RCMP or Youth Justice. Pre-sentence rehabilitation: L.A. has adopted a relatively prosocial and healthy lifestyle. Specifically: a.
 L.A. does not and has never consumed alcohol, drugs or substances of any kind, and they were not involved in the offence before the court; b.
 L.A. is in Grade 10, at [omitted for publication] School, in Prince George, BC. L.A. fully intends to complete high school and has plans for his future; c.
 L.A. is athletic and an avid football player. He would love to have the opportunity to pursue a professional football career, but understands that may not come to fruition. He also has an interest in the trades and next year may opt for a blended program which will allow him to take his academic courses while learning a trade. He may also consider joining the military; d.
 L.A. also participates in sports other than football, such as recreational basketball; and e.
 L.A. spends his free time actively engaged in pro-social activities with his friends. There are no reports of L.A. engaging in a negative lifestyle or associating with negative peers. Ongoing risk to the community: In assessing his risk to reoffend, Dr. Schwartz took into consideration L.A.’s “limited insight, and cognitive distortions with a tendency to deny and minimize.” Dr. Schwartz opined that these risk factors “may be targets of treatment intervention.” That said Dr. Schwartz assessed L.A.’s risk of re-offence as low. 
Psychiatric Social Worker Ludwig (“PSW Ludwig”) describes L.A.’s struggles with school. Although his teachers consider L.A. a capable student, over the years he has required supports due to his lack of organization, non-participation, or failing to hand in his school work. L.A.’s school records indicate a long history of behaviour issues, which include non-compliance, absences, disrespect, inappropriate language, interfering with others’ learning, and “focusing/redirection issues.” Nevertheless, PSW Ludwig reports that L.A. as no history of criminal activity, violence or aggression, prior to the offence for which he is now before the court. She states at para. 52 that L.A. is identified by his family as a friendly, and cooperative individual who excels at sport. One of his most oft described strengths is his for compassion, empathy, consideration of others, respectfulness and willingness to help others. YPW Melissa Lawrence is extremely positive about L.A.’s circumstances, his behaviour, and his future prospects. In fact, she does not consider an Intensive Support and Supervision Order as necessary. Rather YPW Lawrence recommends a period of probation on the terms and condition set out on page 8 of her report with the addition of counselling. 
L.A. has indicated in Court his willingness to engage in counselling; I
find L.A. presents a low risk of reoffending generally or violently. I draw this conclusion because L.A. has not demonstrated any criminal behaviour other than that for which he is being sentenced. 
Guilty plea: L.A. was convicted after a trial, which is not aggravating but it does deprive him of the mitigating effect of a guilty plea; Remorse: Despite his non-guilty plea, L.A. has consistently expressed remorse for injuring D.A., and I accept his remorse as genuine. YPW Lawrence states: [L.A.] looks back on the offence with regret and is ashamed at what he did to another person. 
Pre-sentence custody: L.A. has not spent any time in pre-sentence detention as a result of this offence. He was arrested and released on a Promise of a Young Person to Appear and Undertaking to a Peace officer on January 16, 2021. Recommendations
 
 Dr. Schwartz made the following recommendation in his Psychiatric report
 
[L.A.] may benefit from participating in offence specific treatment provided through Youth Forensic Psychiatric Services (YFPS). Offence specific treatment provides individual counselling with a treatment focus on experience, expression, and control of emotions; understanding the experience and expression of aggressive impulses; and the offence cycle and relapse prevention specifically. A focus of treatment may include improved insight, reality testing and problem-solving. L.A. may also benefit from improving stress management, coping skills, interpersonal skills, and self-discipline.
 
[L.A.] may benefit from psychiatric follow up to address symptom of anxiety as needed. [L.A.] may access psychiatric follow-up through YFPS.
 
[L.A.] may benefit from support and encouragement to maintain regular school attendance. He may benefit from a structured and organized school environment that supports his attendance, participation, and progress. He may benefit from the support of a school counsellor and/or peer tutor to focus on academic skills and to fully complete work assignments. He may benefit from continued participation in activities he enjoys such as technology, physical education, and sports. 
 
[L.A.] may benefit from medical follow-up to assess and treat what he described as “ringing in my ears.”
 
[L.A.] may benefit from family therapy available through YFPS. Family therapy may improve [L.A.’s] ability to communicate with family members, express himself openly, and participate in mature and healthy conflict resolution. Impact on the victim and the community a.
 The age of the victim: D.A. was 16 at time of the offence, and although young, he was not as young as L.A.; b.
 Victim vulnerability: At the time of the offence, D.A. was older, stronger and taller, than L.A.; c.
 Victim Impact: Neither the Crown Counsel nor the Youth Probation Officer were able to obtain a Victim Impact Statement from D.A. It seems he wants to put this incident behind him and does not welcome any further involvement in the court process in this matter; and d.

Community impact: The Court can consider the prevalence of violent offences in the community in involving young male adolescents. 
Collateral consequences
 
 The collateral consequences are not necessarily aggravating or mitigating factors as they do not relate to the gravity of the offence or the level of responsibility of the offender: R. v. Pham, 2013 SCC 15 and R. v. Suter, 2018 SCC 34. Nevertheless, they do speak to the personal circumstances of the offender. The consequences can flow from the function of legislation, or social, personal, or occupational implications. L.A. has reported to the Youth Probation Officer the community supervision conditions have had an adverse impact on his ability to fully participate in his favour school team sport, of football. 
Disposition
 
 When imposing sentence upon a young offender, a youth court judge must be cognizant of the inherent differences between adults and young persons and the different approaches to sentencing adopted by the Criminal Code and the YCJA. There is a presumption of a diminished moral blameworthiness for young persons who commit crimes. Because he is young, I must consider the long-term impact of any sentence I impose upon L.A. The sentence I impose must facilitate his rehabilitation while at the same time hold him accountable for his actions.
 
 The YCJA indicates that a sentencing judge “may” consider the sentencing principles of specific deterrence and denunciation. These principles militate toward a custodial sentence for violent offences in order to reflect their seriousness and to hold the youth accountable. Accountability, however, does not automatically invite a custodial sentence. A youth can be held accountable through lesser sanctions and the YCJA directs judges to use custodial sentences only when no other sentence is reasonable. 
 

L.A.: On August 11, 2022, I found you guilty of assault with a weapon (a knife) contrary to s. 267(a) of the Criminal Code; unlawfully causing bodily harm to D.A. contrary to s. 269 of the Criminal Code; and possessing a weapon (a knife) for a dangerous purpose contrary to s. 88(1) of the Criminal Code. 
 

I am sentencing you to conditional discharge with 8 months’ probation pursuant to s. 42(c)(k) of the Youth Criminal Justice Act, on the following terms and conditions: Condition 1: You shall keep the peace and be of good behaviour. 
Condition 2: You shall appear before the Youth Justice Court when required to do so by the Court. 
Condition 3: You shall report in person to the Youth Worker no later than 3:00 PM on January 12, 2023, at the Youth Probation Office located at 1040 Third Avenue, Prince George, BC, and after that you shall report as and when directed by the Youth Worker. 
Condition 4: You shall reside in BC, and you shall not change your residence at any time without first obtaining the written consent of the Youth Worker. 
Condition 5: You shall obey all rules and regulations of your residence. 
Condition 6: You shall have no contact or communication, directly or indirectly, with [D.A.] except as follows: except for writing a letter of apology under the direction of your Youth Worker who will attend to deliver it to [D.A.]. 
You shall not attend at, or be any place which you know to be the residence of [D.A.] except: (a) while on a highway in a moving motor vehicle in transit to somewhere else; and (b) except you can attend the school which [D.A.] attends for the purpose of sporting events. 
Condition 7: You shall not possess any weapon as defined in Section 2 of the Criminal Code. 
Condition 8: You shall not possess any knife outside of your residence except for the immediate preparation or eating of food, or for purposes directly and immediately related to your school work. 
Condition 9: You shall attend, participate in and successfully complete any assessment, counseling or program as directed by the Youth Worker. Without limiting the general nature of this condition, such assessment, counseling or program may include and relate to: a) anger management. 
Condition 10: You shall attend school regularly and not be absent except in accordance with either a medical certificate or the advance written consent of the Youth Worker. 
Condition 11: You shall apologize to [D.A.] in the manner you are directed by the Youth Worker to the satisfaction of the Youth Worker. Ancillary Orders As part of your sentence, I also make the following ancillary orders: a.
 Count 1, assault with a weapon, contrary to section 267(a) Criminal Code is a primary designated offence. Pursuant to s. 487.051(1) of the Criminal Code I make an order in Form 5.03 authorizing the taking of the number of samples of bodily substances by any Peace Officer for the Province of British Columbia that is reasonably required for the purpose of forensic DNA analysis and registration in the National DNA Databank from C.Z.; and, b.

Pursuant to s. 487.051(4) of the Criminal Code I further make an order in Form 5.041 that you shall attend at the RCMP Detachment in Prince George, B.C., on or before April 30, 2021, during regular business hours, and submit to the taking of the samples.
 

Pursuant to s. 119(1)(s)(ii) of the YCJA, I order that a copy of the reports marked Exhibits 1, 2, and 3 in this sentencing hearing together with my August 12, 2020, Reasons for Judgment and these Reasons for Sentence be released to the Youth Worker for case management purposes.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/pc/2023bcpc6.html
 


On December 29, 2021, Mr. Owen Reginald Bitternose pled guilty to the following Counts 1 and 3, on Information No. 242294-1: Count 1: Owen Reginald BITTERNOSE, on or about the 7th day of November, 2020, at or near Surrey, in the Province of British Columbia, did possess a prohibited firearm, restricted firearm, or non-restricted firearm, without being the holder of a licence under which he may possess the firearm, or without being the holder of a registration certificate for the firearm, contrary to Section 91(1) of the Criminal Code. Count 3: Owen Reginald BITTERNOSE, on or about the 7th day of November, 2020, at or near Surrey, in the Province of British Columbia, did possess a firearm, prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device, a modified SKS rifle, while he was prohibited from doing so by any order under this Act or any other Act of Parliament, contrary to Section 117.01(1) of the Criminal Code.
 


The Crown seeks a jail sentence of 18 months on Count 1 and six months on Count 3, to be served consecutively. The Crown also seeks a lifetime firearms prohibition order under s. 109(1)(d) of the Criminal Code on both Counts, and a DNA order under s. 487.051(1) of the Criminal Code, on a secondary designated offence basis, also to be attached to both Counts.
 


The defence submits that a sentence of 18 months less one day on Count 1 and six months on Count 3, with a global sentence of 24 months less one day to be served as a conditional sentence order (“CSO”), followed by a two-year probation order, is an appropriate sentence for Mr. Bitternose.
 


The defence takes no position on the two ancillary orders the Crown seeks. It asks that the victim surcharge be waived, as it would cause undue hardship to Mr. Bitternose. CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE OFFENCES
 


On November 7, 2020, Mr. Bitternose was drinking and hanging out with some people outside a hotel on 104 Street, in Surrey, British Columbia. One of the men he was hanging out with decided to go with him to his place to hang out and continue to drink.
 


That evening, at or about 7:20 p.m., a Surrey RCMP officer was conducting traffic patrol in the vicinity of 105A Avenue and King George Boulevard in Surrey, British Columbia. He noticed, and went over to, a taxi stopped, with its hazard lights on. The taxi driver told the officer that there was an intoxicated man in the backseat, yelling racial slurs and punching the glass divider. The officer opened the backseat door and found a visibly intoxicated man with a strong odour of liquor emanating from his breath, who was clutching a backpack in his hand. The officer arrested the man for causing a disturbance. This man was later determined to be Mr. Bitternose. The index offences arose out of a search incidental to arrest. The police found an unloaded modified SKS rifle (the “Rifle”) and an empty bottle of vodka in the backpack. There was no ammunition on Mr. Bitternose’s person or in the backpack. CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE OFFENDER
 


Mr. Bitternose’s circumstances are horrifically tragic. The following is a summary of the pertinent circumstances gleaned from the pre-sentence report dated February 11, 2022 (the “PSR”), the Gladue report dated June 17, 2022 (the “Gladue Report”), and the submissions of the Crown and defence at the sentencing hearing: (a)
 
Mr. Bitternose was born on [omitted for publication] in Regina, Saskatchewan. He is 45 years of age now, and was 43 years at the time of the index offences. (b)
 
Mr. Bitternose is Saulteaux/Cree and a member of the George Gordon First Nation. (c)
 
Mr. Bitternose has an older sister M., older brother Q., and younger sisters L. and V. He has two children: daughter D., aged [omitted for publication], and son J., aged [omitted for publication]. (d)
 
Mr. Bitternose’s sister L. was murdered in 2019, his mother G.B. passed away in 2000 or 2001 from cirrhosis as a result of chronic alcoholism, and his father V.B. passed away in 2021 from Covid-19. (e)
 
Multiple generations of Mr. Bitternose’s family attended the Gordon’s Indian Residential School, including his grandparents, parents, brother and himself. At around age five, Mr. Bitternose attended this residential school for about four years, where he was sexually abused. The Gordon’s Indian Residential School is infamous for its abuses of children, and it was one of the last residential schools in Canada to close in 1996. (f)
 
Mr. Bitternose’s parents were severe alcoholics. Mr. Bitternose describes his mother as a “scary person.” He and his brother lived with their paternal grandparents on the George Gordon First Nation, whereas his sister M.B. lived with their maternal grandparents on the Standing Buffalo First Nation, which was about an hour from the George Gordon First Nation. However, Mr. Bitternose was separated from his sister M. until he was 19 years of age. (g)
 
After Mr. Bitternose’s paternal grandparents passed away, he and his brother went to live with their aunt and uncle in Regina, where he began Grade 3. He was active in sports and enjoyed being social. However, he experienced a lot of racism in the city. (h)
 
Mr. Bitternose did not have contact with his parents during his childhood and youth. (i)


Even though his aunt and uncle provided a stable home, Mr. Bitternose started getting into trouble at about age 12. He became involved in substance use and criminal activity with his friends. He quit school after Grade 8. He was in juvenile detention. He spent the majority of his teen years in custody. At age 18, he was released from custody. He began working in Regina. However, he continued to struggle with his alcohol and other substance addictions. (j)


Mr. Bitternose’s offending continued, as an adult. He has an unenviable criminal record. The Crown points out that Mr. Bitternose has been convicted of an offence at least once a year since 1996. Mr. Bitternose’s offences gradually escalated from property and driving related offences to more serious and violent offences, including aggravated assault, assaulting a peace officer, robbery, and discharging a firearm with intent. At the time of the index offences, Mr. Bitternose was already on two mandatory lifetime firearm bans. (k)
 
Mr. Bitternose has spent a significant part of his adult life in federal custody, including at the Special Handling Unit (“SHU”) in Quebec. He spent two years and nine months at the SHU, one year in Edmonton, and in a Saskatchewan penitentiary for 11 years. He was then released from federal custody in May 2020. He came to Vancouver, British Columbia, to extricate himself from further negative influences in Saskatchewan. (l)


While incarcerated, Mr. Bitternose’s aunt and uncle passed away from cancer in 2018 and 2019, respectively. (m) 
Mr. Bitternose’s sister-in-law, S.M., states that Mr. Bitternose has endured a lot of trauma in his life, he was incarcerated consecutively from 2004 to 2020, and that when she met him upon his release in 2020, “he was so happy.” (n)
 
After his release, Mr. Bitternose started working in construction in Vancouver, which he says he really loved. (o)
 
However, in the summer of 2021, Mr. Bitternose was hospitalized with pneumonia and a double lung infection. He was in a coma for 10 days. He is unable to physically exert himself as he used to. He has been placed on permanent disability. He expresses frustration with his inability to work, as it brought him joy and purpose. He believes he is in good mental health. He has not been diagnosed with any mental disorder. He denies any serious traumatic brain injury, but shared that he was hit by a car at age five and spent weeks recovering. (p)
 
At the time of the sentencing hearing, Mr. Bitternose was registered at the [omitted for publication] and was in the process of completing courses to obtain his high school diploma. He was attending this program four days per work. After this, his intention is to enrol in computer courses, and also get his trade ticket to become an equipment operator. (q)
 
Mr. Bitternose is currently living with his girlfriend, M.S., who has known him personally for about two years. She indicates that she has known about Mr. Bitternose for the past 20 years. She came to Vancouver looking for work, and has resided with Mr. Bitternose ever since she arrived in Vancouver. She describes Mr. Bitternose as a “social,” “kind and positive” person, who enjoys going on walks and keeping himself busy. (r)
 
Ms. M. describes Mr. Bitternose as a “pleasant” and “very well mannered” person. She emphasizes that Mr. Bitternose has the “potential to do really well, but he needs to be around the right people.” She says, he has “stepped away from gang life” and he “realizes that those people are not his family.” (s)
 
Mr. Bitternose’s sister V.K. says Mr. Bitternose has “good communication skills,” that he is a “hard worker,” and “[h]e’s really good at talking with people. He’s a really loving guy. Even though he went to residential school, he can show emotions.” (t)
 
Mr. Bitternose is currently unemployed, and he receives social assistance benefits. He is on methadone, and is said to be abstinent from illicit substances and alcohol. He smokes marihuana on a regular basis. (u)
 
Mr. Bitternose has insight into his past addiction issues, and understands how anti-social peers can influence him and his future. He regrets associating with the unknown individual who punched the plexiglass in the cab he was in, and says he feels “stupid and foolish” for involving himself with people he knows can get him into trouble. Although he maintains he was not aware of what was in the bag this other individual left behind in the cab, he understands that “by associating with ‘those’ types of people he would be risking issues with the law.” 
(v)
 
Mr. Bitternose has been compliant with his bail conditions from the time he was placed on them on November 9, 2020 in relation to the index offences. For the past two years, he has not incurred any new charges or had any negative police contact. The PSR notes that Mr. Bitternose’s “history of non-compliance in the community only exist[s] in his youth, as it is his only substantial time outside of custody.” (w)

Mr. Bitternose is said to be respectful, and he has maintained good communications with his bail supervisor. (x)
 
Mr. Bitternose does not have contact with his band currently and does not receive any funding or support. The PSR notes that Mr. Bitternose shares respect for his culture, but does not feel it is an investment, and that it is not a priority for him. However, the Gladue Report indicates that Mr. Bitternose recognizes the benefits of the following restorative justice and community treatment options and would accept the opportunity to participate: a.
 trauma counselling through the First Nations Health Authority – Indian Residential Schools Health Resolution Support Program; b.
 further academic upgrading with the assistance of staff in Indigenous Advising at [omitted for publication] after he completes his Adult Basic Education certificate; c.
 the Employment, Life Skills & Training program provided by the Vancouver Aboriginal Friendship Centre Society; and d.
 access to housing support through the Urban Aboriginal Navigation Team – Community Housing Support Services and the TLC (Tenant-Landlord-Community Relations) Project. CROWN’S SUBMISSIONS
 


While the Crown does not object to the global sentence of 24 months less a day that the defence seeks, it submits that this sentence must be served in custody, and not in the community by way of a CSO. It says a CSO is not appropriate in Mr. Bitternose’s case due to Mr. Bitternose’s significant criminal record and public safety concerns.
 


The Crown says Mr. Bitternose has an extremely aggravating record with serious offences, including aggravated assault, assault of a peace officer, robbery, and discharge of a firearm with intent; he has been under a s. 109 prohibition order since 1999, and yet he was found in possession of the Rifle in a taxi, in a public place, when he had been out of custody for only approximately six months; and the fact that he was intoxicated, while in possession of the Rifle in a public place adds to his recklessness.
 
 The Crown submits that denunciation and deterrence are the primary considerations in sentencing Mr. Bitternose. Given the gravity of Mr. Bitternose’s criminal record and the public safety concerns posed by the index offences, the Crown submits a jail sentence is necessary.
 
 The Crown submits that the case law indicates that a sentence for a s. 117.01 offence is generally served consecutive to a s. 91 offence.
 
 The Crown referred to the following cases in support of its position: R. v. McWhirter, 2018 BCSC 1768 (“McWhirter”); R. v. Veranski, 2010 BCCA 211; R. v. Gomes, 2015 ONCA 763; R. v. Frohock, 2009 BCCA 227 (“Frohock”); R. v. Alkins, 2007 ONCA 264; R. v. Ayala-Barrios, 2007 CanLII 86929 (ON CJ), OJ No. 5393 (“Ayala-Barrios”); and R. v. Ball, 2014 BCCA 120 (“Ball”). DEFENCE’S SUBMISSIONS
 
 The defence says that the Crown’s sentencing position was 24 months’ incarceration before the Gladue Report was completed. However, even after the completion of the Gladue Report, which details the significant Gladue factors in Mr. Bitternose’s background, the Crown’s sentencing position has not changed. The defence argues that the Crown has failed to take into account the Gladue factors present in Mr. Bitternose’s background.
 
 The defence further argues that none of the offenders in the case law that the Crown relies on is an Indigenous offender, charged with similar s. 91(1) and s. 117.01 offences. I note that in Frohock, the offender was of Métis decent. However, the offences at issue in Frohock were far more egregious (the firearms offences were under s. 91(2), s. 94(1), and s. 95(1)).
 
 The defence says, the Supreme Court of Canada, in R. v. Ipeelee, 2012 SCC 13 (“Ipeelee”), calls upon judges to use a different method of analysis in determining a fit sentence for Indigenous offenders (with the offender necessarily being Indigenous); however, in none of the Crown’s cases, the offenders are Indigenous (with the exception of Mr. Frohock that I noted above). Therefore, the defence submits that those cases cannot be useful comparators to determine a fit sentence for Mr. Bitternose.
 
 The Crown’s cases of some relevance are McWhirter and Ball. In McWhirter, the Court discussed the range of sentence for firearms offences. As indicated earlier, Mr. McWhirter is not Indigenous. He was sentenced to 12 months’ jail for the s. 91(1) offences (at para. 100) and to six months’ jail for the s. 117.01 offences, consecutive to the sentence on the s. 91(1) offences (at para. 104). At para. 105, the Court said sentences for s. 117 breaches will typically range between six to 12 months. Earlier, in Ball, the Court of Appeal for British Columbia had also said that generally sentences on s. 117 breaches will be consecutive, and will typically range between six to 12 months (at para. 24).
 
 The defence submits that the principles of denunciation and deterrence can be satisfied by a CSO. It says by giving effect to the rehabilitation principle and applying the unique approach necessary in sentencing Mr. Bitternose, as an Indigenous offender, lead to a CSO being a fit sentence for Mr. Bitternose for the index offences.
 
 The defence referred to the following cases in support of its position: Ipeelee; R. v. Parranto, 2021 SCC 46; R. v. Sellars, 2018 BCCA 195 (“Sellars”); R. v. Hiscock, 2020 BCCA 355; R. v. Mero, 2021 BCCA 399 (“Mero”); R. v. Cootes, 2011 BCCA 398; and R. v. Colligan, 2020 BCSC 1139 (“Colligan”). In particular, it relies on Sellars and Mero.
 
 Mr. Sellars was an Indigenous offender. The three firearms offences at issue in Sellars included unauthorized possession of a loaded handgun, contrary to s. 95(1), which was more serious than the s. 91(1) offence that Mr. Bitternose has pled guilty to.
 
 In Sellars, the Court of Appeal for British Columbia allowed the Crown’s appeal of an order suspending the passing of sentence and imposing a three-year probation order. The Court concluded that in light of the significant Gladue factors applicable to Mr. Sellars’ circumstances and his exceptional mitigating circumstances, a sentence below the range for firearms offences (being three to four years) was justified. The Court varied Mr. Sellars’ sentence to a conditional sentence order of two years less one day, with specified conditions.
 
 Mr. Mero was also an Indigenous offender. He was convicted of possession of a loaded restricted firearm and possession for the purpose of trafficking. He appealed his custodial sentences. His appeal was allowed. The Court concluded that in light of the significant Gladue factors applicable to Mr. Mero’s circumstances, a penitentiary sentence of 40 months on the weapons charge and eight months on the trafficking charge were unfit. Rather, a conditional sentence order of two years less a day on the weapons charge and 12 months’ probation on the trafficking charge were determined to be proportionate and better achieved the sentencing goals of denunciation, deterrence and rehabilitation, while meaningfully addressing the overrepresentation of Indigenous people in custody. The Court also noted that the reduced sentences were in line with sentences imposed for similar offenders convicted of similar offences in similar circumstances. EFFECT ON THE VICTIM(S)
 
 The parties did not make any submissions with respect to any victim impact, other than the Crown noting the general public safety concern due to the presence of the Rifle in a public place. PURPOSE, OBJECTIVES AND PRINCIPLES OF SENTENCING
 
 Section 718 of the Criminal Code states that “[t]he fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society and to contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions that have one or more of the following objectives: 
(a) to denounce unlawful conduct and the harm done to victims or to the community that is caused by unlawful conduct; (b) to deter the offender and other persons from committing offences; (c) to separate offenders from society, where necessary; (d) to assist in rehabilitating offenders; (e) to provide reparations for harm done to victims or to the community; and (f) 
to promote a sense of responsibility in offenders, and acknowledgement of the harm done to victims or to the community.
 
 Section 718.1 sets out the fundamental principle in sentencing. It states that “[a] sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.”
 
 Section 718.2 sets out other sentencing principles that a sentencing judge must take into account in imposing a sentence. It states, in part, as follows: 718.2 A court that imposes a sentence shall also take into consideration the following principles: a)
 a sentence should be increased or reduced to account for any relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or the offender,... b)
 a sentence should be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences committed in similar circumstances; c)
 where consecutive sentences are imposed, the combined sentence should not be unduly long or harsh; d)
 an offender should not be deprived of liberty, if less restrictive sanctions may be appropriate in the circumstances; and e)

all available sanctions, other than imprisonment, that are reasonable in the circumstances and consistent with the harm done to victims or to the community should be considered for all offenders, with particular attention to the circumstances of Aboriginal offenders. DISCUSSION
 
 The defence agrees with the Crown that deterrence, denunciation and protection of the public are important sentencing principles in this case, but emphasizes that equally important is Mr. Bitternose’s rehabilitation. I agree.
 
 However, the challenge lies in crafting a sentence that balances all of these important sentencing principles, giving particular attention to the circumstances of Mr. Bitternose, as an Indigenous offender.
 
 In R. v. Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64, at para. 58, the Supreme Court of Canada pointed out that the determination of a just and appropriate sentence is a highly individualized exercise that goes beyond a purely mathematical calculation, and that everything depends on the gravity of the offence, the offender’s degree of responsibility, and the specific circumstances of each case.
 
 In R. v. Bhalru and R. v. Khosa, 2003 BCCA 645 (“Bhalru/Khosa”), the Court of Appeal for British Columbia discussed at length how the level of moral culpability of an offender is determined. At paras. 28 and 37, the Court said:
 
The level of moral culpability is determined in part by considering the intentional risks taken by the offenders, the degree of harm that they have caused, and the extent to which their conduct deviates from the acceptable standard of behaviour: see C.A.M., supra 80; R. v. Johnson (1996), 1996 CanLII 3148 (BC CA), 112 C.C.C. (3d) 225 ¶33, 84 B.C.A.C. 261. . . .
 
The assignment of blameworthiness for a particular course of conduct depends not only on the circumstances of the offence, but also on the nature of the offender. The fundamental principle of sentencing requires that a sentence be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.
 
 Here, in terms of the gravity of the index offences, it is highly concerning that Mr. Bitternose was found in possession of the Rifle, in a taxi, in a public place.
 
 The Crown pointed to the following passage in Ayala-Barrios, wherein the Court, at p. 4, said: There is no doubt that the existence of illegal guns on the streets is a serious problem. . . . there is no purpose for a sawed off shotgun but to intimidate or seriously harm someone. 
Any sentence imposed by the court has to be sufficiently severe to reinforce the message that illegal possession of firearms will not be tolerated and reflects societies [sic] abhorrence for this type of offence. . . . the potential for serious injury or even death is magnified by just the presence of such a weapon.
 
 In the end, the Court imposed a 12-month conditional sentence on Mr. Ayala-Barrios.
 
 In Mr. Bitternose’s case, the defence points out that the firearm offence that Mr. Bitternose pled guilty to is possession of a “modified” SKS rifle under section 91(1), and that an SKS rifle is a non-restricted firearm. It says there appears to be some modifications to shorten its length, but there is no further evidence before the court that it is anything other than a non-restricted rifle. It was not loaded, and Mr. Bitternose did not use the Rifle in any threatening way. It was simply present in the backpack. Mr. Bitternose did not possess any ammunition on his person or in the backpack.
 
 Regardless, I am of the view that Canadian society would not condone anyone carrying a firearm in a public place, unless authorized to do so by law.
 
 However, there are several other factors which mitigate Mr. Bitternose’s moral culpability. I am not satisfied that Mr. Bitternose intentionally took the risk of possessing the Rifle in a public place. Mr. Bitternose was highly intoxicated during the incident, and was in the company of other likely unsavory people. He does not know how he came into possession of the Rifle. The Rifle was not loaded, and no one was harmed during the incident.
 
 Mr. Bitternose’s moral culpability is also reduced by the significant Gladue factors present in his circumstances.
 
 I have a statutory duty, under s. 718.2(e) of the Criminal Code, to consider the unique systemic or background factors that may have played a part in bringing Mr. Bitternose before the court and the types of sentencing procedures and sanctions which may be appropriate in the circumstances for Mr. Bitternose because of his particular Indigenous heritage or connection, as noted in Ipeelee, at paras. 59 and 60: 
 
. . . s. 718.2(e) of the Code is a remedial provision designed to ameliorate the serious problem of overrepresentation of Aboriginal people in Canadian prisons, and to encourage sentencing judges to have recourse to a restorative approach to sentencing (Gladue, at para. 93). It does more than affirm existing principles of sentencing; it calls upon judges to use a different method of analysis in determining a fit sentence for Aboriginal offenders. Section 718.2(e) directs sentencing judges to pay particular attention to the circumstances of Aboriginal offenders because those circumstances are unique and different from those of non-Aboriginal offenders (Gladue, at para. 37). When sentencing an Aboriginal offender, a judge must consider: (a) the unique systemic or background factors which may have played a part in bringing the particular Aboriginal offender before the courts; and (b) the types of sentencing procedures and sanctions which may be appropriate in the circumstances for the offender because of his or her particular Aboriginal heritage or connection (Gladue, at para. 66). Judges may take judicial notice of the broad systemic and background factors affecting Aboriginal people generally, but additional case-specific information will have to come from counsel and from the pre-sentence report (Gladue, at paras. 83-84). 
 
. . . To be clear, courts must take judicial notice of such matters as the history of colonialism, displacement, and residential schools and how that history continues to translate into lower educational attainment, lower incomes, higher unemployment, higher rates of substance abuse and suicide, and of course higher levels of incarceration for Aboriginal peoples. These matters, on their own, do not necessarily justify a different sentence for Aboriginal offenders. Rather, they provide the necessary context for understanding and evaluating the case-specific information presented by counsel. Counsel have a duty to bring that individualized information before the court in every case, unless the offender expressly waives his right to have it considered. . . .
 
 In Mr. Bitternose’s case, I have the benefit of the PSR, the Gladue Report, and detailed submissions from the defence with respect to Mr. Bitternose’s unique personal circumstances, which I have already detailed above. There can be no doubt that Mr. Bitternose, and his family members, have been hugely impacted by matters such as the history of colonialism, displacement, and residential schools that the Supreme Court of Canada referred to in Ipeelee, at para. 60. Mr. Bitternose’s sister, V.K., discussed with the Gladue Report writer of the devastating impacts the Gordon’s Indian Residential School has had on her family. She says, “Owen [Bitternose] was always so curious about the culture, but he didn’t know where to start,” and the residential school experience for their family members was “really bad. It was terrible.” Mr. Bitternose appears to have lost connection to his Indigenous heritage, culture, and traditions. As I said, the PSR notes that while Mr. Bitternose shares respect for his culture, he does not feel it is an investment.
 
 Mr. Bitternose’s parents were severe alcoholics. Mr. Bitternose also suffered from alcohol and other substance abuse. He experienced abuse and significant trauma caused by the sexual and physical abuse he endured while attending the Gordon’s Indian Residential School. He quit school after Grade 8, and was in custody for the better part of his life. Ms. M. notes that Mr. Bitternose “endured a lot of trauma in his life, not just as a child.” Mr. Bitternose says that he faced a lot of discrimination growing up in the City of Regina, and then later within the prison system, he was harshly treated.
 
 In determining a fit sentence, I also need to take into account the mitigating and aggravating circumstances in Mr. Bitternose’s case. Mitigating Circumstances
 
 I find the following circumstances to be mitigating in Mr. Bitternose’s case: (a) Mr. Bitternose has pled guilty to the index offences, avoiding the need for a trial, thereby saving valuable court time and resources. (b) Although Mr. Bitternose does not remember how he came into possession of the Rifle, he admits he had knowledge of it even though he did not own it or make any modifications to it, and he accepts responsibility for its possession and his offending. He is genuinely remorseful for what happened. (c) Mr. Bitternose has been compliant with his bail conditions for the past two years, and he has not committed any new offence. (d) Mr. Bitternose comes from a significantly disadvantaged background, and has suffered significant abuse and trauma throughout his life. (e) Mr. Bitternose currently suffers from health issues (serious lung infection), and has been placed on medical disability. (f) 
Despite his past and current challenges, Mr. Bitternose has taken concrete and steady efforts to turn his life around, including the following: a.
 Although Mr. Bitternose has had a long history of substance addiction, he has been clean and sober for the past two years. b.
 Mr. Bitternose, of his own volition, has been attending counselling to address his past trauma. c.
 Mr. Bitternose is in the process of completing his high school diploma at the [omitted for publication], and he intends to continue his education by enrolling in computer classes and also getting his trade ticket to become an equipment operator. (g) 
Mr. Bitternose is described as a kind, loving, positive and hard working person. He has the support of his girlfriend, and his close family members. Aggravating Circumstances
 
 I find the following circumstances to be aggravating in Mr. Bitternose’s case: (a) 
Mr. Bitternose has a significant criminal record, including serious violent offences that includes a related firearm conviction for discharge of a firearm with intent. (b) 
Mr. Bitternose was placed on three s. 109 mandatory firearms prohibition orders, in 1999, 2003 and 2005, respectively. He was subject to the latter two orders for lifetime firearms prohibition when he committed the index offences. (c) Mr. Bitternose was found in possession of the Rifle in a taxi, in a public place, while intoxicated.
 
 While the Crown and the defence agree on the length of the sentence, they disagree on how it should be served – in jail or in the community, raising the issue of whether a CSO is appropriate in Mr. Bitternose’s circumstances.
 
 Mr. Bitternose is a man who has endured unspeakable harshness and trauma in his life. He now appears to be in the midst of finding the right path forward in his life, by going to school, extricating himself from his past negative peers, and trying to keep out of trouble from the law.
 
 The question is, should this traumatized man, who is trying to build a positive life for himself, be thrown in jail again for the index offences? Is that the only way that the sentencing principles of deterrence, denunciation, and protection of the public can be met, as the Crown submits?
 
 The defence says that while Mr. Bitternose’s record is lengthy and indicates some violent and serious offences, including discharging a firearm, a criminal record is only one factor in sentencing considerations. It says that while the index offences are serious, they are not violent. 
 
 The defence submits that to go from serving two years and nine months at the SHU, which is the “maximum” of the “maximum-security facilities” in the country to attending classes at the [omitted for publication] and obeying a release order for more than two years while in the community, speaks to Mr. Bitternose’s character and the extent of his efforts to turn his life around.
 
 The defence notes that Mr. Bitternose has never been placed on a CSO in the past. It says Mr. Bitternose first went to residential school, and then to jail. Given his compliance with his release order for the past two years, there is no indication that he will not comply with a CSO.
 
 Taking a holistic view of all of the circumstances in Mr. Bitternose’s case, I am not convinced that he should serve the proposed sentence of 24 months less a day in custody.
 
 I will now turn to whether a CSO is appropriate in Mr. Bitternose’s case.
 
 In Colligan, which also involved an Indigenous offender, the Court, at para. 53, provided a helpful distillation of the principles relating to CSOs. The Court said:
 
Proulx is the leading case on CSOs. In the context of this case, the following principles from Proulx are germane: 1.


CSOs were introduced to address the problem of over-incarceration in Canada by reducing reliance on incarceration as a sanction and increasing the use of restorative justice principles; 2.


CSOs must be distinguished from probation. While probation is primarily a rehabilitative tool, CSOs have both punitive and rehabilitative aspects; 3.


Generally, CSOs should include punitive terms that restrict an offender’s liberty, such as house arrest; 4.


Unless the Code excludes a CSO as a sentencing option, there should be no presumptions for or against the use of a CSO in relation to any specific offence; 5.


A sentencing judge is not required to first impose a prison term of fixed duration and then consider if it can be served in the community. Rather, the sentencing judge should reject a penitentiary term and probation measures as inappropriate and then consider whether the remaining option of imprisonment of less than two years could be appropriately served in the community; 6.


A CSO need not be of the same duration as the sentence of incarceration that would otherwise have been imposed. All that is required is that the CSO is a fit sentence; 7.


The requirement that the sentencing judge be satisfied that the safety of the community would not be endangered by the offender serving their sentence in the community is a condition precedent to the imposition of a CSO; 8.


In making this threshold determination, the sentencing judge should consider the risk posed by the specific offender and not the broader risk of whether a CSO would endanger the safety of the community by providing insufficient general deterrence or undermining general respect for the law; 9.


A CSO can provide significant denunciation and deterrence. Generally, the more serious the offence, the longer and more onerous the CSO should be; 10.

 In some cases the need for denunciation or deterrence may be so pressing that incarceration will be necessary; 11.

 Generally, a CSO will be better than incarceration at achieving restorative objectives, such as rehabilitation, reparations and promoting a sense of responsibility in offenders; 12.

 Where a combination of both punitive and restorative objectives may be achieved, a CSO will likely be more appropriate than incarceration; and 13.

 A CSO may be imposed even though there are aggravating circumstances that increase the need for denunciation and deterrence.
 
 In Proulx, at para. 46, the Supreme Court of Canada, listed the criteria that must be satisfied before a CSO can be imposed under s. 742.1. It said:
 
This provision lists four criteria that a court must consider before deciding to impose a conditional sentence: 1)
 the offender must be convicted of an offence that is not punishable by a minimum term of imprisonment; 2)
 the court must impose a term of imprisonment of less than two years; 3)
 the safety of the community would not be endangered by the offender serving the sentence in the community; and 4)

a conditional sentence would be consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing set out in ss. 718 to 718.2.
 
 In Mr. Bitternose’s case, I am satisfied that the requirements under s. 742.1 of the Criminal Code for imposing a CSO are met for the following reasons: (a) The index offences are not punishable by a minimum term of imprisonment. (b) The term of imprisonment being imposed is less than two years. (c) The safety of the community would not be endangered by Mr. Bitternose serving the sentence in the community, as he will be placed under very strict conditions, including curfew, and monitored for a lengthy period of time. He has done well on his release order for the past two years. (d) Mr. Bitternose indicated to the court that he is focused on completing his Grade 12 education and then getting his trade ticket as an equipment operator, as he enjoyed his work in the construction industry. He has a stable home with his girlfriend, and they are both attending counselling for trauma issues. He is moving forward with his life in a positive and pro social manner. (e) A CSO is consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing set out in ss. 718 to 718.2, as it strikes a balance between the need to denounce, deter, protect the public, keep Mr. Bitternose (as an Indigenous offender) out of prison, and to give Mr. Bitternose the opportunity to rehabilitate himself. 
(f) 
Mr. Bitternose has spent the better part of his life in jail. He appears resolute from the time he was placed on the release order in November 2020 to change his life around. He appears to have made effective use of this time by engaging in self-reflection, making plans for his future, and attending educational programs and counselling to assist in his rehabilitation. It serves no purpose to incarcerate him, adding to the overrepresentation of Indigenous offenders in custody. (g) The CSO is a measured approach to allow Mr. Bitternose to continue with his rehabilitative efforts and pursue the recommendations made in the Gladue Report, but at the same time protect the public, as it is a fairly lengthy sentence to be served in the community under tight conditions, and in the watchful eye of his conditional sentence supervisor. (h) The CSO also serves as a specific deterrence to Mr. Bitternose, as he may end up having to serve the balance of his sentence in custody if he breaches the CSO. SENTENCE
 
 I have considered the unique circumstances of Mr. Bitternose, the nature and extent of the index offences, the submissions and case authorities of the Crown and the defence, and the sentencing purpose, objectives and principles. I conclude that a global sentence of 24 months less a day of imprisonment, to be served in the community in the form of a conditional sentence, followed by 24 months’ probation to be a just sanction for Mr. Bitternose.
 
 Mr. Bitternose, I am sentencing you on Information No. 242294-1, to a global sentence of 24 months less a day of imprisonment to be served in the community in the form of a conditional sentence, with the global sentence allocated as follows: on Count 1, 18 months less one day, and on Count 3, six months, consecutive to the term on Count 1. You will then be placed on a probation order for a period of 24 months. I will outline the conditions of these orders shortly.
 
 If you do not follow the conditions of the CSO, you could be arrested, kept in custody, and your conditional sentence could be suspended and you could be ordered to serve the remaining portion in custody.
 
 If you do not follow the conditions of the probation order, you could be charged with an offence, arrested, kept in custody, and, if convicted, you could be sentenced to jail.
 
 I will now turn to the conditions of these two orders. Conditional Sentence Order:
TERM OF THE
 ORDER
First, you must comply with a conditional sentence
 order for a term of 24 months less one day. The conditions are as follows:
COMPULSORY CONDITIONS 3001
You must keep the peace and be of good
 behaviour. You must appear before the court when required
 to do so by the court. You must notify the court or your
 conditional sentence supervisor in advance of any change of name or address
 and promptly notify the court or supervisor of any change in employment or
 occupation. You must remain in British Columbia
 unless you have prior written permission from the court or your conditional
 sentence supervisor to leave the province. 
REPORT 
3103
You must report in person to a
 conditional sentence supervisor at Suite 102, 14245 56 Avenue, Surrey,
 British Columbia, by 3:00 p.m. tomorrow, January 11, 2023, and after that,
 you must report as directed by your conditional sentence supervisor. 
ADDRESS: NO CHANGE WITHOUT CONSENT 3201
When first reporting to a conditional sentence
 supervisor, you must provide them with the address or location where you live
 and regularly sleep and your phone number if you have one. You must not change them without the
 prior written permission from your conditional sentence supervisor.
CURFEW 3209-1
For the first 12 months of this order: 1.

 You must obey a curfew by being
 inside the place where you live and regularly sleep between 9:00 p.m. and
 6:00 a.m. The exceptions are: a.

 You have the prior written
 permission of your conditional sentence supervisor. Such permission is to be
 given only for education, employment, or other reasonable purposes. b.

 You are going directly to, or returning directly from, a healthcare
 facility because of a medical emergency. (You have consented in court to
 providing proof of your attendance at the healthcare facility if requested by
 your conditional sentence supervisor.) 2.

 You must present yourself
 immediately at the door to the place where you are living or answer the phone
 when any peace officer or conditional sentence supervisor attends or calls to
 check on you during the curfew. 3.

 If you are given permission by
 your conditional sentence supervisor, you must carry it with you in paper or
 electronic format at all times when you are away from the place where you
 live and regularly sleep. 4.

 If a peace officer finds you
 outside the place where you are living during the curfew hours and requests
 to see the permission, you must show it to the officer.
CHANGES IN EMPLOYMENT/ RELATIONSHIP STATUS 3212
You must
 provide your conditional sentence supervisor with the details of your
 employment status. You must inform your supervisor within two business days
 of any change in your employment status.
NO ALCOHOL OR DRUGS 3400
You must not
 possess or consume alcohol, drugs, or any other intoxicating substances,
 except with a medical prescription.
NO GO LIQUOR OUTLETS 3403
You must not enter any liquor store, beer
 and wine store, bar, pub, lounge, nightclub, beer garden, or any other
 business from which minors are prohibited at any time by the terms of a
 liquor licence.
COUNSELLING 3501
 
You must attend, participate in and complete any
 intake, assessment, counselling, or education program as directed by your
 conditional sentence supervisor. This may include counselling or programming
 for: a.

 alcohol or substance use; 
b.

 mental health; and c.

 trauma recovery. 
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS PROHIBITION 3610
You must not possess directly or indirectly any
 weapon as defined by the Criminal Code. 
Including: a.
 firearms and
 ammunition; b.
 crossbows,
 prohibited or restricted weapons or devices, or explosive substances; 
c.
 anything used,
 designed to be used, or intended for use in causing death or injury to any
 person, or to threaten or intimidate any person; d.
 any imitation
 firearms or weapons, including any compressed air guns, BB or pellet guns; or e.
 any related
 authorizations, licences and registration certificates, and you must not
 apply for any of these.
 
 I now turn to the Probation Order. Probation Order:
length
 OF probation order 2000-1
You must comply with the
 probation order for a term of 24 months. The conditions are as follows:
COMPULSORY CONDITIONS 2001
 
You must keep the peace
 and be of good behaviour. You must appear before
 the court when required to do so by the court. You must notify the court
 or your probation officer in advance of any change of name or address and
 promptly notify the court or the officer of any change in employment or
 occupation.
REPORTING AFTER COMPLETION OF CONDITIONAL SENTENCE 2104
You must report in
 person to a probation officer at Suite 102, 14245 56 Avenue, Surrey, British Columbia, within two business days after completion of your
 conditional sentence, unless you have obtained before completion of your
 conditional sentence, written permission from a probation officer to report
 elsewhere or within a different time frame. After that, you must report as
 directed by your probation officer.
ADDRESS: NO CHANGE
 WITHOUT NOTICE 2202
When first reporting to a probation officer, you
 must provide them with the address or location where you live and regularly
 sleep and your phone number if you have one. You must not change them without notifying your
 probation officer, in writing, at least seven days before making the change.
NO ALCOHOL OR DRUGS 2400
You must not possess or consume alcohol, drugs, or any
 other intoxicating substances, except with a medical prescription.
COUNSELLING 2501
 
You must attend, participate in and complete any
 intake, assessment, counselling, or education program as directed by your probation
 officer. This may include counselling or programming for: a.
 alcohol or substance use; 
b.
 mental health; and c.
 trauma recovery. 
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS PROHIBITION 2610
You must not possess directly or indirectly any
 weapon as defined by the Criminal Code. 
Including: a.
 firearms and ammunition; b.
 crossbows,
 prohibited or restricted weapons or devices, or explosive substances; 
c.
 anything used, designed to be used, or intended for
 use in causing death or injury to any person, or to threaten or intimidate
 any person; d.
 any imitation firearms or weapons, including any
 compressed air guns, BB or pellet guns;
 or e.
 any related authorizations, licences and
 registration certificates, and you must not apply for any of these.
ANCILLARY ORDERS Firearms Prohibition Order
 
 Pursuant to ss. 109(1)(d) and 109(3) of the Criminal Code, you are prohibited from possessing any firearm, crossbow, restricted or prohibited weapon, prohibited device, ammunition and explosive substance for life. This order attaches to Counts 1 and 3 on Information 242294-1. DNA Order
 
 Counts 1 and 3 on Information 242294-1 are secondary designated offences. After considering the factors set out in s 487.051(3) of the Criminal Code, I am satisfied that it is in the best interest of the administration of justice to authorize the taking of samples of bodily substances from you.
 
 You must attend at the Surrey RCMP Detachment on or before January 20, 2023 and submit to the taking of the samples. This order is valid until executed. VICTIM SURCHARGE
 

Pursuant to s 737(2.1) of the Criminal Code, I am satisfied that because of your precarious financial circumstances caused by your health conditions and unemployment, the surcharge would cause an undue hardship to you. Therefore, I order you to pay no victim surcharge. CONCLUSION
 
 That concludes my reasons for sentence. Thank you.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/bc/pc/2023bcpc4.html
 


On April 8, 2022, after a multiday trial, I found that the Public Prosecution Service of Canada ("PPSC") had proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Adam Thomas Munro and 605463 B.C. Ltd. committed the offences alleged in Court Information 6930-1:
Count 1 Between July 22, 2018 and August 11, 2018, at or near the Village of Masset, in the Province of British Columbia, while carrying out activities under the authority or a licence, to wit, Salmon Area F Salmon Troll Licence 2018, did contravene or fail to comply with a condition of licence, to wit: fishing for Chinook shall cease when the maximum set out in subsection 1(1)(a)(i) is reached, contrary to Section 22(7) of the Fishery (General) Regulations, and did thereby commit an offence contrary to s. 78(a) of the Fisheries Act. Count 2 Between April 30, 2019 and July 17, 2019, at or near the Village of Masset, in the Province of British Columbia, while carrying out activities under the authority of a licence, to wit, Salmon Area F Salmon Troll Licence 2018, did contravene or fail to comply with a condition of licence, to wit: the licence holder shall ensure that all paper harvest logs issued are delivered to the catch reporting service provider by April 30, 2019, contrary to s. 22(7) of the Fishery (General) Regulations, and did thereby commit an offence contrary to s. 78(a) of the Fisheries Act. Count 3 Between July 22, 2018 and August 30, 2018, at or near the Village of Masset, in the Province of British Columbia, did sell fish caught in contravention of the Fisheries Act or its regulations contrary to s. 33 of the Fisheries Act, and did thereby commit an offence contrary to s. 78(a) of the Fisheries Act. Count 4
Between July 22, 2018 and August 30, 2018, at or near the Village of Masset, in the Province of British Columbia, did possess fish caught in contravention of the Fisheries Act or its regulations, contrary to s. 33 of the Fisheries Act, and did thereby commit an offence contrary to s. 78(a) of the Fisheries Act.
Facts
 


The neutral citation for my Reasons for Judgment, which includes the full facts of the case, is 2022 BCPC 77. 
 


In brief, 605463 B.C. Ltd. owned and operated a commercial fishing vessel Winter Wind. 
605463 B.C. Ltd. is an incorporated British Columbia company. Michael Andrew Bullock is the sole director and officer of 605463 B.C. Ltd. 
Bullock was the contact owner with the Department of Fisheries and Oceans for the Winter Wind. On July 22, 2018, and August 11, 2018, Munro was the skipper, also known as the vessel master, of the Winter Wind.
 


In 2018, the Winter Wind had a salmon/troll licence with conditions of licence attached, allowing the Winter Wind to retain a maximum of 0.4149 percent of the 2018 Area F Total Allowable Catch ("TAC") of Chinook salmon. In 2018, 0.4149 percent equalled 390 Chinook salmon.
 


On July 22, 2018, Munro and 605463 B.C. Ltd. offloaded 346 Chinook salmon caught on the Winter Wind. In practical terms, as a result of catching and offloading 346 salmon on July 22, 2018, the conditions of licence allowed the Winter Wind to catch and offload a further 44 Chinook salmon unless another licence holder transferred a share of their TAC to the Winter Wind.
 


Although a licence holder's TAC cannot be carried from one year to the next, it is a common practice in British Columbia for licence holders in the commercial fishery to transfer a share of their TAC to another licence holder. The conditions of licence specifically allowed for such a practice. Bullock and 605463 B.C. Ltd. regularly participated in the practice.
 


Fisheries and Oceans Canada ("DFO") is not involved with the licence holders' negotiations or financial dealings concerning the decision to transfer a share. As such, the DFO is unaware of the terms agreed to by the parties. All that matters to the DFO is that a valid application to transfer a share is submitted to them. Upon receiving the valid application to transfer a share, the DFO processes the application. Upon approval, the DFO assigns a Chinook Quota Reallocation Confirmation Number certifying completion of the Chinook quota reallocation. In the Winter Wind's case, the conditions of licence allowed the Winter Wind to acquire a maximum total uncaught quota equal to three Individual Transferrable Quotas, which equates to 1.245 percent of the 2018 Area F TAC. In other words, 1,170 Chinook salmon.
 


Sometime before July 22, 2018, as in previous years, Bullock relied upon his ex-wife to arrange for 605463 B.C. Ltd. to purchase another commercial fishing licence holder's 2018 Area F TAC of Chinook salmon. In cooperation with Nick at 7 Seas, Bullock's ex-wife arranged with 7 Seas and a fishing licence holder named Chinalibut for 605463 B.C. Ltd. to pay $4,000 for Chinalibut's 0.4149 percent share of the 2018 Area F TAC of Chinook salmon. 605463 B.C. Ltd. paid the $4,000 transfer price to 7 Seas. In doing so, 605463 B.C. Ltd. anticipated adding 390 Chinook salmon to Winter Wind's allowable catch bringing its TAC to 780 Chinook salmon for 2018.
 


On August 11, 2018, Munro and 605463 B.C. Ltd. offloaded 261 Chinook salmon caught on the Winter Wind, which were sold to 7 Seas. 
 

For reasons left unexplained at Trial and during sentencing submissions, the transfer of Chinalibut's 0.4149 percent share of the 2018 Area F TAC of Chinook salmon to the Winter Wind was not completed and, accordingly, on August 11, 2018, the Winter Wind only had room for an additional 44 Chinook salmon on its licence. Consequently, on August 11, 2018, the Winter Wind was 217 Chinook salmon over its quota limit, and therefore 217 were illegally fished for, possessed, and sold. Sentencing Positions of the Parties
 

The PPSC seeks a punitive sentence for both defendants, emphasizing the principles of general and specific deterrence. Specifically, the PPSC relies upon several case authorities, including the leading British Columbia decisions of R. v. Brown, 2010 BCCA 225 and R. v. Schafhauser, 2017 BCSC 2287, and the recent Supreme Court of Canada decision in R. v. Vallieres, 2022 SCC 10.
 

In Brown, a case that involved the harmful alteration, disruption or destruction of fish habitat contrary to the Fisheries Act, our Court of Appeal confirmed that the leading case on the principles of sentencing for environmental offences is R. v. Terroco Industries Limited, 2005 ABCA 141. In doing so, our Court of Appeal reinforced that sentencing principles for environmental offences require a unique approach, with specific emphasis on the areas of culpability, past involvement with the authorities, acceptance of responsibility, harm, and deterrence. 
 

In Schafhauser, a summary conviction appeal case involving a commercial salmon fisher in Haida Gwaii, Justice Punnett confirmed that: 
The Fisheries Act is regulatory legislation designed to protect and preserve a valuable resource and any contravention of it must be taken seriously. Accordingly, the predominant sentencing consideration must be deterrence, both specifically of the accused and generally of other members of the public who are inclined to act in the same manner. Penalties must be sufficiently severe to communicate to the accused that there is a high risk associated with their illegal activities both for the resource they are affecting and to themselves for their conduct, (see R. v. Cox; NJ 264, NFLPC), R. v. Forsey, the latter at NJ. No. 264 (NLPC) at paragraph 20). 
 
In this instance, the sentencing judge appropriately highlighted the need for an appropriate sentence to deter similar conduct by the commercial fishing community generally and specifically by Mr. Schafhauser. I note that many of the authorities refer to the fact that a penalty should be more than simply a cost of doing business. In particular, in this instance, that is significant because this is a regulatory statute designed to preserve a valuable resource. In sentencing on regulatory offences, our Court of Appeal has accepted the following sentencing principles: culpability, prior record, acceptance of responsibility and remorse, the damage or harm done, and deterrence (see R. v. Terroco Industries Limited, 2005 ABCA 141 (CanLII), 2005 196 CCC (3d) 293, a decision of the Alberta Court of Appeal, pages 304 to 311; and R. v. Brown, 2010 BCCA 225, at paragraph 13).
 

Counsel for the PPSC submits that the Court ought to impose the following penalties: i.


 Count 1: A $15,000 fine to each defendant. ii.


Count 2: A $5,000 fine to each defendant. iii.

 Count 3: A $5,000 fine to each defendant. iv.

 Count 4: A $5,000 fine to each defendant. v.


A 2023 commercial fishing licence suspension for 605463 BC Ltd. vi.

 A disgorgement penalty by way of a s. 79 Fisheries Act additional penalty of $21,081.38 to be split between the defendants ($10,540.69 for each defendant). $21,081.38 is the amount of the monetary benefits received by the defendants. The Fish Slips set out the monetary profit made on August 11, 2018: a.


The defendants were allowed to fish for, possess and sell 44 Chinook salmon on August 11, 2018. Nevertheless, 261 Chinook salmon were caught, possessed and sold on August 11, 2018. Accordingly, 217 too many Chinook salmon were caught, possessed and sold on August 11, 2018. 
b.


Expressed as a percentage, 217 is approximately 83 percent of 261. c.


A total of $25,399.25 worth of Chinook salmon was caught, possessed, and sold on August 11, 2018. 
d.


Eighty-three percent of $25,399.25 is approximately $21,081.38. 
 

Counsel for the defendants vehemently disagrees with the PPSC's sentencing position and points to several mitigating factors: i.


 605463 B.C. Ltd. paid $4,000 to 7 Seas to transfer Chinalibut's TAC to 605463 B.C. Ltd.
ii.


605463 B.C. Ltd. and Munro had successfully engaged Nick at 7 Seas for the previous five years in acquiring other fisher's TACs. iii.

 The defendants had an honest, albeit mistaken, belief that 605463 B.C. Ltd. had acquired Chinalibut's TAC adding 390 Chinook salmon to 605463 B.C. Ltd.'s 2018 allowable catch. As such, these are not offences of dishonesty. The defendants did not set out to steal fish. They tried to follow the rules but did not use due diligence. Accordingly, the present case is properly characterized as more of a "record-keeping offence." 
iv.

 Chinalibut did not fish for, possess or sell the 390 Chinook salmon that the defendants mistakenly believed had been transferred to 605463 B.C. Ltd.'s 2018 TAC. v.


605463 B.C. Ltd. has no enforcement history. Although Bullock has an enforcement history, he was acquitted at Trial. The Court should not pierce the corporate veil to penalize Bullock indirectly. vi.

 While Munro has an enforcement history, he has 25 years in the fishing industry and has done well, considering that he has dyslexia, has suffered from thyroid cancer, and like many others involved in the commercial fishing industry, has suffered financially from the uncertainty that is endemic in Canada's commercial fishery. vii.

 The defendants were not grossly negligent. viii.

It is not in the public interest to require the defendants to pay a disgorgement penalty by way of a s. 79 Fisheries Act additional penalty. ix.

 Applying the "totality principle" to the facts of the present case should result in a significantly smaller fine than the amount sought by the PPSC.
 

In light of the mitigating factors present, the defendants seek a global fine of $5,500 for each defendant, broken down as $5,000 for counts 1, 3 and 4, plus $500 in total for count 2. Discussion
 

Munro and Bullock are experienced commercial fishers. 605463 B.C. Ltd. was incorporated on April 14, 2000. Bullock became the sole director and shareholder of 605463 B.C. Ltd. on March 29, 2006. 605463 B.C. Ltd. has owned the Winter Wind since November 20, 2014. 
 

Munro, who is from a family of commercial fishers, is 38 years of age. He has a grade 9 education and has difficulty reading. Munro believes himself to have a learning disorder such as dyslexia. For the past two years, Munro has not been able to support himself financially and has had to rely upon his parents as he has been recovering from thyroid cancer. 
 

It is important to remember that Bullock – who had been charged per s. 78.2 of the Fisheries Act in his capacity as an officer, director or agent of 605463 B.C. Ltd. -- was acquitted at Trial. Bullock is 50 years of age, and he has been a commercial fisher for at least 25 years. As such, I am not here to sentence Bullock; instead, I am here to sentence the company he is the sole director and shareholder of. Furthermore, Bullock made a conscious decision to separate his personal affairs from his business affairs, as evidenced by the fact that 605463 B.C. Ltd. owns the Winter Wind and is the licence holder.
 

For at least five years before the offences in this matter, Munro, Bullock, and 605463 B.C. Ltd. had been utilizing the services of Nick at 7 Seas to facilitate the purchase and transfer of other company's TAC's to allow Munro, Bullock, and 605463 B.C. Ltd. to lawfully fish for, possess and sell fish in excess of their initial TACs. Indeed, in the present case, the agreed sale price of $4,000 had been paid by 605463 B.C. Ltd. to 7 Seas for Chinalibut's 0.4149 percent share of the 2018 Area F TAC of Chinook salmon. 
Culpability
 

I believe 605463 B.C. Ltd. and Munro share fifty/fifty the responsibility for the wrongdoing or failure in the present case. 
 

Concerning counts 1, 3 and 4, 605463 B.C. Ltd. should have ensured -- before allowing Munro and the Winter Wind to leave port on August 11, 2018 -- that the DFO had assigned a Chinook Quota Reallocation Confirmation Number certifying completion of the Chinook quota reallocation from Chinalibut for 605463 B.C. Ltd. Likewise, Munro, as an experienced commercial fisher and skipper, should have refused to begin fishing before he had confirmation that the DFO had assigned a Chinook Quota Reallocation Confirmation Number certifying completion of the Chinook quota reallocation from Chinalibut for 605463 B.C. Ltd.
 

Concerning count 2, 605463 B.C. Ltd. should have had a system to track the return of all paper harvest logs from the Winter Wind in 2018 to the catch reporting service provider by April 30, 2019. Likewise, as an experienced commercial fisher and skipper, Munro should have ensured the delivery of the paper harvest logs from his fishing trips in 2018 to the catch reporting service provider by April 30, 2019. Prior Record
 
 Munro has a prior fishing record: June 26, 2015 – A warning for violating s. 26(1)(a) of the Fishing (General) Regulations. 
August 11, 2017 – A warning for violating s. 26(1)(a) of the Fishing (General) Regulations. August 18, 2017 -- A warning for violating s. 26(1)(a) of the Fishing (General) Regulations. February 4, 2019 -- Two convictions for violating s. 22(7) of the Fishing (General) Regulations on July 10, 2018, when he had barbed hooks and a non-functioning revival tank onboard the vessel.
 

While Munro’s two convictions for violating s. 22(7) of the Fishing (General) Regulations relate to offences that predate the violations in the present case; the convictions were not entered until February 4, 2019. He was sentenced to a total of $2,500 in fines. Furthermore, while I am allowed to take notice of the three warnings issued to Munro before August 11, 2018, I must temper my knowledge of the warnings with the reality that warnings are subjective allegations untested in Court or otherwise subjected to judicial oversight.
 
 605463 B.C. Ltd. does not have a prior fishing record. Bullock, on the other hand, has a prior fishing record dating back to 1997, including: Two convictions for violating s. 78 of the Fisheries Act, 
One conviction for violating s. 33 of the Fisheries Act, 
Eight convictions for violating s. 22(7) of the Fishing (General) Regulations, One conviction for violating s. 11 of the Fishing (General) Regulations, 
One conviction for violating s. 12 of the Fishing (General) Regulations, and
Six warnings for violations of the Fishing (General) Regulations.
 

Julie Chen, in Modernizing Corporate Veil Piercing in Canada: Revisiting Yaiguaje v Chevron and its Transnational Governance Gap, provides a succinct description of what piercing the corporate veil means: In Canada, “piercing the corporate veil” refers to the common law judicial power whereby courts can set aside limited liability or separate legal personality, which can be for the purpose of making shareholders liable for a corporation’s debts. Early Canadian decisions applying the principle of corporate veil piercing drew on English court cases. The doctrine can be applied in both contracts and torts cases. An empirical study of the doctrine in Canada demonstrated that the manner in which courts apply veil piercing is highly contextual and differs based on case-specific factors. Generally recognized grounds for corporate veil piercing have included concepts such as agency or use of the corporate structure for improper purposes. In explaining their reasons, Canadian courts, including the Supreme Court, have also relied on preventing manifest unfairness, general interests of justice, and the role of equitable remedies as the “conscience” of law. The exact formulation of the doctrine remains debated. Julia Chen, Modernizing Corporate Veil Piercing in Canada: Revisiting Yaiguaje v Chevron and its Transnational Governance Gap, 2021 18-1 McGill Journal of Sustainable Development Law 63, 2021 CanLIIDocs 13217.
 

Based upon the facts of the present case, including that Bullock was charged and acquitted in his capacity as an officer, director or agent of 605463 B.C. Ltd., I am not prepared to pierce the corporate veil concerning Bullock and 605463 B.C. Ltd. Accordingly, I am sentencing 605463 B.C. Ltd. as an entity with no prior enforcement record. Acceptance of Responsibility and Remorse
 
 Regarding counts 1, 3 and 4, 605463 B.C. Ltd. and Munro accept that they errored in failing to confirm that Chinalibut's TAC had been secured and the transfer approved by DFO before the Winter Wind set out from port on August 11, 2018. At trial, the defendants pursued a technical and legalese defence, attacking legislative drafting that leaves room for improvement. I do not doubt that 605463 B.C. Ltd. and Munro genuinely wish they had not been negligent and, in the future, will ensure that the details of any anticipated TAC transfer are complete before the Winter Wind leaves port. They accept that what they did was wrong. Likewise, concerning count 2, 605463 B.C. Ltd. and Munro accept that their failure to submit the paper harvest logbooks is unacceptable.
 

However, the defendants’ negligence in failing to confirm the completion of the transfer of Chinabut’s TAC and failing to submit the paper harvest logbook on time is not a mere administrative or accounting detail. The requirements were conditions of the fishing licence. The failure to comply with the condition of licence and acquire the additional allowable TAC means that the 217 Chinook salmon fished for, possessed and sold were illegally fished for, possessed and sold. The failure to submit the paper harvest logbook was a flagrant breach of a fundamental licence condition. The data provided by the harvest logbooks is crucial to the ability of DFO to manage the fisheries for the benefit of all Canadians properly. The defendants knew what needed to be done. They did not do what needed to be done through either carelessness or laziness. It was no oversight or forgetfulness. Accordingly, with respect, these are not merely record-keeping offences. Harm Done
 

There is a saying in basketball, “no harm, no foul.” Defence counsel submits that the same principle should apply in the present case. Counsel seeks to discount the harm done by urging the Court to accept that there has been no foul in the present case. Counsel submits that the convictions in the present case are for what can be described as record-keeping offences. While it is true that concerning counts 1, 3 and 4, Chinabut – the firm that was supposed to transfer its TAC -- did not fish for, possess or sell the excess 217 Chinook salmon; nonetheless, the integrity of the commercial fishing industry did take a hit. As regards count 2, I cannot overemphasize that accurate catch records are a crucial indicator of the health of the commercial Chinook salmon fishery. The failure to provide a harvest logbook to DFO as required by a condition of licence has the possibility of affecting the setting of quota allocations to support sustainability. 
 

The DFO impact statement provided to the Court in R. v. Henneberry, 2019 NSSC 119, in paragraph 28, provides an excellent summary of the harm done in cases such as the present: Illegal retention of fish, misreporting, and failure to report catch have major consequences for the sustainability of fish stocks, the integrity of the management and monitoring systems, and the economics of the fishery. Ultimately, honest licence holders suffer negative financial consequences through lower quotas, more conservative by-catch limits, and higher costs of doing business. All Canadians pay higher management, enforcement, and legal costs for the damage done to a common property resource and to the marine ecosystem. It is also important to note that when licence holders have been successful at circumventing the rules and there are little consequences to their actions, other licence holders observe the outcomes. If illegal fishing practices go unchecked, the potential for other licence holders to advance in this direction increases, placing the stock and ecosystem at a higher risk. Additionally, misreporting impacts the processes used to establish catch limits and the management regime which ensures those limits are respected. Deterrence
 

It has long been accepted that the paramount principle of sentencing in commercial fishing cases is specific and general deterrence. 
 

The fines to be levied, combined with what has been a time-consuming and, no doubt, costly process for the defendants to engage in, will act to deter them specifically. 
 

Nevertheless, general deterrence needs to be addressed. In considering general deterrence, I adopt the words of Judge Mrozinski as set out in the second half of paragraph 44 in R. v. McKinnell Fishing Ltd.,2016 BCPC 466: 
…There may have been a time in the distant past when a mind of a practical bent might have wondered about the futility of the finer points of fisheries laws. 
In the present day, there is no room for such complacency. In a world in which resource sustainability is strained, not just by demand but by the environment itself, the value of regulatory compliance cannot be overstated. And at paragraph 46, Seen in this light, while the defendant's transgressions may, to it, have seemed innocuous, they clearly are not. The failure to comply with its licence and regulations has the potential to contribute to a failure of this fishery, particularly if all fishers were of the same view. It is for this reason, clearly, that virtually all of the case law before me in this sentencing emphasizes the importance of the sentencing objectives of specific and general deterrence in regard to these regulatory offences.
 

The sentence I impose must deter others engaged in the commercial fishing industry who fail to account for the minutiae of licensing conditions. The sentence must recognize that tedious paperwork cannot be forgotten or dismissed. Deadlines must be met, and DFO approval must be sought and gained when required by one’s licence conditions.
 

When viewed in the context of the defendants in the present case, the sentence I am imposing will act as a deterrent to other commercial fishers. Conclusion
 

In fashioning a sentence specific to 605463 B.C. Ltd. and Munro, I have considered the Supreme Court of Canada's teachings in R. v. Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64, and the case law provided by counsel. I have also considered the moral blameworthiness of 605463 B.C. Ltd. and Munro, which I find to be the middle of the scale for both defendants. I accept that 605463 B.C. Ltd. and Munro did not set out to break the law. On the other hand: i.


 605463 B.C. Ltd. did not undertake the actions required of a responsible commercial fishing vessel owner/operator to ensure that the DFO had assigned a Chinook Quota Reallocation Confirmation Number certifying completion of the Chinook quota reallocation from Chinalibut for 605463 B.C. Ltd. before August 11, 2018; ii.


605463 B.C. Ltd. did not undertake the actions required of a responsible commercial fishing vessel owner/operator to ensure that the paper harvest logs from the July 22, 2018, and August 11, 2018, fishing trips were submitted as required to the catch reporting service provider by April 30, 2019; iii.

 Munro did not undertake the actions required of a responsible commercial fishing vessel skipper to ensure that the DFO had assigned a Chinook Quota Reallocation Confirmation Number certifying completion of the Chinook quota reallocation from Chinalibut for 605463 B.C. Ltd.; and iv.

 Munro did not undertake the actions required of a responsible commercial fishing vessel skipper to ensure that the paper harvest logs from his fishing trips on July 22 and August 11, 2018, were submitted as required to the catch reporting service provider by April 30, 2019.
 

In Lacasse, the Supreme Court of Canada instructed that the overarching principle is that a sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender, the latter of which means the offender's moral blameworthiness. The principle of parity, which requires a consideration of sentences imposed on similar offenders in similar circumstances, informs the proportionality analysis, ensuring that the sentence is both individually proportionate and proportionate with sentences given to other offenders in similar situations.
 

That said, we are cautioned at paragraph 54 in Lacasse:
 
 The determination of whether a sentence is fit also requires that the sentencing objectives set out in s. 718 of the Criminal Code and the other sentencing principles set out in s. 718.2 be taken into account. Once again, however, it is up to the trial judge to properly weigh these various principles and objectives, whose relative importance will necessarily vary with the nature of the crime and the circumstances in which it was committed. The principle of parity of sentences . . . is secondary to the fundamental principle of proportionality. This Court explained this as follows in C.A.M.: It has been repeatedly stressed that there is no such thing as a uniform sentence for a particular crime. . . .Sentencing is an inherently individualized process, and the search for a single appropriate sentence for a similar offender and a similar crime will frequently be a fruitless exercise of academic abstraction.
 

In paragraph 58 of Lacasse, concerning the applicability of sentencing ranges, the Court explained:

There will always be situations that call for a sentence outside a particular range: although ensuring parity in sentencing is in itself a desirable objective, the fact that each crime is committed in unique circumstances by an offender with a unique profile cannot be disregarded. The determination of a just and appropriate sentence is a highly individualized exercise that goes beyond a purely mathematical calculation. It involves a variety of factors that are difficult to define with precision. This is why it may happen that a sentence that, on its face, falls outside a particular range, and that may never have been imposed in the past for a similar crime, is not demonstrably unfit. Once again, everything depends on the gravity of the offence, the offender's degree of responsibility and the specific circumstances of each case. . .
 

Based upon the lack of financial information provided by counsel about the defendants, I cannot say if the fines requested by either counsel are appropriate for these two defendants. 
 

Unlike in a Family Court matter, where parties are routinely required to file a Financial Statement that sets out their savings plus income and expenses for at least three, if not more, years, I do not know in the present case if the defendants are destitute or flush with cash. 
 

Defence counsel has told the Court that Munro has been battling thyroid cancer and had to rely upon his parents financially over the past two years, but does this mean that Munro is broke or has no prospects in 2023 and forward to earn a significant income? And I do not know the financial situation of 605463 B.C. Ltd. The company could be worth millions. Bullock may have received tens or hundreds of thousands from 605463 B.C. Ltd. in dividends or cash withdrawals over the past five years. I do not know.
 

I am cognizant that $40,540.69 in fines and penalties for a person who makes $200,000 a year in income is not the same as $40,540.69 in fines and penalties for a person earning British Columbia's minimum wage of $15.65 per hour. Likewise, I am aware that $40,540.69 in fines is not the same for a company with a significant net worth and assets, as it is for an unemployed person dealing with health issues or a small family-owned and operated company with little or no cash value.
 

Section 734(2) of the Criminal Code, which applies to all Acts of Parliament, including the Fisheries Act, makes it clear that when determining the appropriate fine amounts to be handed out in the present case, I cannot blindly pick dollar figures out of the air. I must consider the defendants’ ability to pay the fine. Section 734(2) reads, Offender’s ability to pay (2) Except when the punishment for an offence includes a minimum fine or a fine is imposed in lieu of a forfeiture order, a court may fine an offender under this section only if the court is satisfied that the offender is able to pay the fine or discharge it under section 736.
 

Without a better understanding of each defendant's current financial position, it is difficult for the Court to craft fines that act as both specific deterrence for the defendants and general deterrence for other commercial fishers and companies involved in the commercial fishing industry. Given what counsel submitted on behalf of the defendants regarding their current financial situation, I am not satisfied that the defendants can pay the fine amounts requested by the PPSC, even if I give the defendants many years to pay the files. 
 

In considering the PPSC's request for a s. 79 Fisheries Act additional penalty, I agree that an additional penalty is appropriate in this case. While the defendants did not set out to break the law, their negligence and lack of due diligence allowed them to financially benefit from the Chinook salmon that were caught, possessed and sold to 7 Seas on August 11, 2018. Based on the Fish Slips, the monetary benefit received by the defendants is $21,081.38. As I previously determined, the responsibility for the wrongdoing or failure in the present case is shared fifty/fifty between 605463 B.C. Ltd. and Munro. Likewise, a review of the Fish Slips indicates that 605463 B.C. Ltd. and Munro were to essentially share the profit from selling the Chinook salmon equally. Accordingly, the s. 79 Fisheries Act additional penalty will be split evenly between the defendants ($10,540.69 for 605463 B.C. Ltd. and $10,540.69 for Munro). If the defendants believe that one of them should be paying more than a 50% share of the disgorgement penalty, they can work that out between themselves.
 

Given: 
1.


my earlier determination that the combination of the fines I impose today with the costs and time spent by the defendants in participating in the Court process will specifically deter the defendants, and 
2.


my decision not to pierce the corporate veil, 
I decline the PPSC’s request to suspend first-time offender 605463 B.C. Ltd.’s commercial fishing licence for 2023. 
Sentences Imposed
 

In respect of 605463 B.C. Ltd., the sentence imposed is as follows: Count 1: $2,500. The time to pay will be December 31, 2026. Count 2: $5,000. The time to pay will be December 31, 2026. Count 3: $1,000. The time to pay will be December 31, 2026. Count 4: $1,000. The time to pay will be December 31, 2026. Section 79 Fisheries Act additional penalty of $10,540.69. The time to pay will be December 31, 2028.
 

In respect of Munro, the sentence imposed is as follows Count 1: $2,500. The time to pay will be December 31, 2026. Count 2: $5,000. The time to pay will be December 31, 2026. Count 3: $1,000. The time to pay will be December 31, 2026. Count 4: $1,000. The time to pay will be December 31, 2026. Section 79 Fisheries Act additional penalty of $10,540.69. The time to pay will be December 31, 2028.
 

All of which is ordered this 6th day of January, 2023.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/ca/2023abca5.html
 



The appellant and his co-accused were convicted of possession of a stolen Honda CR-V and of robbing a Toyota 4Runner. The appellant challenges his convictions on the basis that the verdicts were unreasonable. He also submits that the trial judge erred in applying the test for circumstantial evidence and in assessing party liability, and that the reasons for conviction were insufficient.
 



The Crown concedes the appeal on the conviction for possession of the stolen Honda CR-V. The trial judge was mistaken when she concluded that the Crown had proved that the Honda CR-V was stolen because it had been identified by its Vehicle Identification Number. There was no evidence adduced about the Vehicle Identification Number.
Background 
 



On June 12, 2019, undercover police were surveilling a third party when they observed the appellant, his co-accused (Ms Benedict), and two other people (Ms A and Mr S) in a Honda CR-V that had been identified as stolen. A number of officers in the Auto Theft Unit tracked the vehicle, on and off, for several hours. They were able to later identify the appellant as the driver of the Honda CR-V on two occasions that evening, once at 6:18 p.m. when he first entered the vehicle and then at 7:20 p.m. when he was fueling the vehicle at a gas station.
 



Between approximately 8:35 p.m. and 9:00 p.m., police observed the Honda CR-V enter a Walmart parking lot and stop beside a Toyota 4Runner. The front passenger of the Honda CR-V, Ms A, exited and lifted the hood. The passenger in the rear driver’s side, Mr S, exited and appeared to be attempting to remove the Toyota 4Runner’s license plate. After abandoning this task, he re-entered the Honda CR-V. Ms Benedict then exited the Honda CR-V, closed the hood, and got back into the vehicle, after which the Honda CR-V left the parking lot. Police never identified the appellant during this time. 
 



At around 9:30 p.m., police observed the Honda CR-V dropping off Ms Benedict in the Calgary neighbourhood of Copperfield. Ms Benedict met Mr Volciuc who was helping a friend sell a Toyota 4Runner. Mr Volciuc believed that Ms Benedict was acting for a potential buyer, her boyfriend. Ms Benedict took the Toyota 4Runner for a test drive and Mr Volciuc was in the passenger seat. Undercover police continued to surveil the vehicles and observed the Honda CR-V following the Toyota 4Runner. Helicopter Air Watch for Community Safety (HAWCS) was also tracking their movements. The Toyota 4Runner eventually drove eastbound on a dead-end gravel road near the outskirts of the city, with the Honda CR-V following behind. The Honda CR-V then turned around and started driving back the way it came, passing an undercover officer in an unmarked truck. The undercover officer was unable to identify the driver of the Honda CR-V. While in the Toyota 4Runner on the gravel road, Mr Volciuc saw a black truck in the rear-view mirror and given his discussion with Ms Benedict, it was assumed it was her boyfriend. In actuality, it was the undercover officer. Ms Benedict stopped the Toyota 4Runner and told Mr Volciuc that he had “to walk alone from here”. He complied as he was not sure if Ms Benedict’s boyfriend, who he believed may be in the truck, would hurt him and he feared for his life. Ms Benedict drove away in the Toyota 4Runner. The undercover officer approached Mr Volciuc and drove him back to Calgary.
 



The appellant and Ms Benedict were arrested in the early morning of June 13, 2019. They were charged with several offences, including possession of stolen property with a value over $5,000 in relation to the Honda CR-V, and robbery of the Toyota 4Runner. 
 



In convicting the appellant of robbery of the Toyota 4Runner, the trial judge relied on circumstantial evidence that the appellant continued driving the Honda CR-V after the police last identified him as the driver at around 7:20 p.m., several hours before Ms Benedict met Mr Volciuc. The trial judge concluded that even though the appellant was not in the immediate vicinity when the robbery of the Toyota 4Runner occurred, he was a party to the robbery because she inferred he drove Ms Benedict to Copperfield in the Honda CR-V, which facilitated the robbery. The trial judge also drew an inference that the appellant was operating the Honda CR-V while it drove in tandem behind the Toyota 4Runner, and that the driver of the Honda CR-V was working in concert with Ms Benedict as she drove the Toyota 4Runner.
Discussion
 



When the Crown’s case depends on circumstantial evidence, in assessing whether a verdict is reasonable the question is whether the trier of fact, acting judicially, could reasonably be satisfied that the accused’s guilt was the only reasonable conclusion available on the totality of the evidence: R v Villaroman, 2016 SCC 33 at para 55.
 



The Crown acknowledges that the only identification evidence of the appellant as the driver of the Honda CR-V occurred at 6:18 p.m. and 7:20 p.m. There is no evidence identifying him thereafter, including during the drive to Copperfield at approximately 9:30 p.m. or following Ms Benedict in the stolen Toyota 4Runner afterwards. 
 

 To convict the appellant of being a party to the robbery when the only identification of him occurred hours before the robbery is not the only reasonable conclusion on this record. Given the gaps in the evidence, it was not a reasonable inference for the trial judge to conclude that the appellant was operating the Honda CR-V at the relevant times to ground his conviction for robbery. 
 

 We allow the appeal and set aside the convictions. The Crown submitted that the appropriate remedy for the charge of possession of stolen property is to order a new trial. In R v Ledesma, 2020 ABCA 411 at para 21, this Court held: 
Where an appeal is allowed on the ground of an error of law, the exercise of discretion to direct a new trial pursuant to s 686(2) depends on whether there was evidence upon which a properly instructed jury might have convicted. If there is no evidence of an essential element of the charge, the court will direct an acquittal because an accused shall not “be again placed in jeopardy after the Crown has failed to prove his guilt in order to give the Crown another opportunity to convict him”: R v NW, 2013 ABCA 393 at para 17 citing R v More (1959), 1959 CanLII 447 (BC CA), 124 CCC 140 (BC CA) at 149-150, 31 CR 59.
 

 In our view, the appropriate remedy on both charges is to enter acquittals. 
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/ca/2023abca26.html
 



The appellant, Jessie Crier, appeals his 18-month global sentence, plus two years probation, for two offences of uttering death threats against his former domestic partner and her new partner, and a police officer. 
 



The appellant argues that his sentence was demonstrably unfit for a first-time offender who entered guilty pleas, completed rehabilitative programs and had relevant Gladue factors. He further argues that the sentencing judge failed to give appropriate weight to mitigating factors and imposed a jail sentence that was longer than necessary considering the circumstances of the offences and the offender.
 



The Crown respondent acknowledges the sentence imposed was a “heavy one” but maintains that the trial judge made no error in principle, nor is the sentence demonstrably unfit.
 



For the reasons that follow, the appeal is allowed.

 II.



Background
 



In early 2020, the appellant’s relationship with his common law partner ended in criminal charges being laid against the appellant (the “2020 charges”) predating these matters. The two have a child together whom the appellant has not seen since that time as an emergency protection order against the appellant was put into place following the 2020 charges. The appellant began using cocaine following the order and continued to do so until his arrest on these offences more than year later.
His former partner now has a new boyfriend and the two have a child together.
 



In March 2021, the appellant posted disparaging comments about his former partner and the investigating officer on his other charges on the “Father’s Rights Alberta” Facebook page. The messages were seen by Lurleen Hilliard, who messaged the appellant directly about the consequences of such posts. The appellant then sent the following message to Ms Hilliard about his former partner, her new boyfriend, their child and Detective Horchuk of the Edmonton Police Service:
I'm not the same person anymore. I have become dark and hateful and murderous with revenge. I plan every day how to kill them both and take their baby from them. That bitch of a cop Steve Horchuk, too. He let my ex wait a whole week to get a sex kit done so I'm planning to get him or his family, the people he loves like he did to me. I'm going to prison so I'm going to become the most evil, nasty thing these people wanted to create. I'm going to either take my own life or I take theirs. It's quite simple in my eyes. I have already accepted I will never see my [child] again so I am going out a hero before I turn into a villain. I'm sorry, I understand your wanting to help but I have no intentions of going to Court or prison. I'm going to do what my spirit is telling me is right and then I'm going to either take my own life or theirs. The system did this to me. Made me insane. Yeah, I realize nothing I do will help me. She won. So I am going out loud before I go out.
 



Ms Hilliard immediately contacted police about the threats and the appellant was arrested within a matter of hours. The appellant admitted to police that he sent the threatening messages but said he would not have followed through with them. A search of the appellant’s phone revealed additional communications in the weeks leading up to his arrest, in which similar threats were made about killing his former partner and her boyfriend and taking their baby.
 



The appellant ultimately entered guilty pleas on the date set for trial and a Gladue report was prepared. It provided that the appellant was adopted as an infant and raised in Maskwacis near Wetaskiwin by friends of his biological mother whom he has met only recently. His biological father is a Mohawk man from Ontario unknown to the appellant. The appellant’s adopted mother and her family attended residential school where they endured abuse; that physical and mental abuse was passed on to the appellant by his mother during his upbringing. The appellant was also sexually abused by his foster sisters over a number of years when he was child. His father’s family did not approve of the appellant’s adoption because he was “white”, which created tensions in the family and eventually the appellant stopped attending family gatherings. More recently, the appellant has been diagnosed with Borderline Personality Disorder, anti-social behaviour, and has issues with post- traumatic stress and insomnia. The appellant has struggled with suicidal thoughts, and attempted suicide twice in 2020 and early 2021; it remains difficult not being able to see his child. 
 



The appellant was 31 at the time of sentencing and had no prior criminal record. The sentencing court also heard that while in remand, the appellant completed courses on parenting, anger management and release planning through Norquest College, various programs though New Life Ministries, and was released on bail and successfully completed a 56-day residential treatment program. At the time of sentencing, he was gainfully employed in the community.
 

 A victim impact statement from Detective Horchuk was entered before the court describing the impact of the offence on his family including his youngest child who has required therapy and medication to cope with anxiety. The officer had to install a security system, fencing and carried a weapon off-duty. While the Crown originally sought a one-year jail term, followed by two years’ probation, counsel subsequently increased its submission to a minimum of 18 months’ incarceration citing the seriousness of the offences and the impact on the officer’s young child. Defence counsel, noting the appellant had spent approximately 4.5 months in custody pre-sentence, sought a disposition of time served followed 12 to 18 months’ probation. 
 

 In oral reasons, the sentencing judge imposed a global sentence of 18 months (nine months consecutive on each charge), reduced by 211 days for time served, and two years probation. She found the sentence was in line with the various cases she reviewed. Further, while noting various mitigating factors, she found that the appellant’s moral culpability remained high, and cited the following aggravating factors:
. . . the prolonged nature of the threats; the fact that they were reduced to writing; the multiple individuals who were threatened by Mr. Crier; the threats were not just to cause bodily harm but to kill; the threats included references to children and family of the complainants; the accused was on release at the time of the threats for serious allegations against one of the complainants; Mr. Crier ignored the attempt by Ms. Hilliard to deescalate the situation; the accused wrote the messages containing the threats to more than one person, not just to Ms. Hilliard, but also at least one other third party; one of the messages refers to not wanting to say too much on the phone, which increases the apparent seriousness of the threats; the threats included threats against a former domestic partner; the threats included threats against a police detective for simply fulfilling his role and his duty in the justice system as a police officer; the threats included an understanding that carrying out the threats would attract a lengthy gaol term and a stated willingness to embrace that gaol term; and the threats have had a long lasting impact on Detective Horchuk's life and an especially severe impact on the psychological wellbeing of his youngest child.
 III.



Issues on appeal
 

 The appellant argues that the sentence was demonstrably unfit and failed to meet parity principles. He further maintains that the sentencing judge failed to give adequate weight to his Gladue and other mitigating factors. The Crown submits that while the sentence was high, it was fit and sufficient weight was given to all relevant factors; it argues deference is owed to the sentencing judge’s decision. 
 

 The Crown consented to bail pending appeal, and reasonably conceded that should this Court find a sentencing error, it does not seek the appellant’s reincarceration on these offences.
 IV.



Analysis
 

 As recently reiterated in R v Friesen, 2020 SCC 9 at paras 25-26, 444 DLR (4th) 1, deference is owed to a sentencing decision unless a sentence is demonstrably unfit, or the sentencing judge made an error in principle that had an impact on sentence.
. . . Errors in principle include an error of law, a failure to consider a relevant factor, or erroneous consideration of an aggravating or mitigating factor. The weighing or balancing of factors can form an error in principle “[o]nly if by emphasizing one factor or by not giving enough weight to another, the trial judge exercises his or her discretion unreasonably” (R. v. McKnight (1999), 1999 CanLII 3717 (ON CA), 135 C.C.C. (3d) 41 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 35, cited in Lacasse, at para. 49). Not every error in principle is material: an appellate court can only intervene if it is apparent from the trial judge’s reasons that the error had an impact on the sentence (Lacasse, at para. 44). If an error in principle had no impact on the sentence, that is the end of the error in principle analysis and appellate intervention is justified only if the sentence is demonstrably unfit.
 

 In our view, the trial judge committed errors of principle which had an impact on sentence and justify appellate intervention.
 

 First, insufficient weight was given to this relatively young, first-time offender’s guilty plea, nor was there any reference to the appellant’s various expressions of remorse. While the guilty plea was not at an early stage in the process, it spared the appellant’s former domestic partner and the police officer from testifying and thereby brought some measure of closure to their victimization. 
 

 Second, while the sentencing judge cited from the Gladue report and was aware of its content, we are satisfied that the impact of the appellant’s uncontested Gladue factors were not properly reflected in her finding related to his moral blameworthiness. The appellant was raised in a cycle of intergenerational trauma, coupled with the actual physical, sexual, and emotional abuse he reported suffering during childhood. The appellant’s background was one of displacement and abandonment which speak to why, when similar intrafamilial issues arose with the breakdown of the appellant’s common law relationship and the forced separation from his child, he spiraled into addiction and attempted suicide; his sense of desperation was clearly manifested in the anger and threats seen in his posts and writing.
 

 While such threats can never be condoned, we see a strong correlation between the constellation of classic Gladue factors and the antisocial, impulsive and immature method by which the appellant chose to express his feelings. His diminished moral culpability in this regard was not recognized by the sentencing judge, nor reflected in the 18-month sentence imposed. 
 

 As this Court stated in R v Swampy, 2017 ABCA 134, at paras 25-26:
… [T]he central purpose of the Gladue analysis is to achieve proportionality. The first principle that a sentence must be proportional to the gravity of the offence and degree of responsibility of the offender has “…long been the central tenet of the sentencing process”: Ipeelee at para 36. The “constrained circumstances of Aboriginal offenders may diminish their moral culpability”, as explained in Ipeelee at para 73. Reduced moral culpability must also affect the proportionality analysis, since moral culpability is one component of the equation. It follows that where there is reduced moral culpability, there is a consequential reductive effect upon the ultimate determination of a fit and proper sentence: Ipeelee at para 87.
It is an error to proceed on the basis that Gladue factors do or do not justify departure from a proportionate sentence . . .Instead, application of the Gladue analysis achieves a proportionate sentence.
 

 Similarly, the appellant’s genuine efforts towards rehabilitation, particularly his sustained and hard work since the offences to address the abuse he suffered as a child and to manage his anger and addictions, are not reflected in the sentence imposed. Rather, in our view, the “crushing” effect of the sentence imposed is inconsistent with the efforts of this first-time offender and, if anything, risked derailment of the significant progress the appellant has made. 
 

 Restraint ought to have weighed heavily in this matter; yet, the sentence imposed was far from the least restrictive, particularly in respect of the circumstances of this Indigenous appellant: ss 718.2(d) and (e) of the Criminal Code. Further, while the sentencing judge determined that the appellant’s 10-month sentence in respect of each offence ought to be reduced by one month each to account for totality, the consecutive sentences imposed were nevertheless “unduly long or harsh”: s 718.2(c) of the Criminal Code. Further, to the extent that the sentencing judge relied on post-trial sentencing decisions where the offender had a record for violence or committed other offences concurrently, these cases had little precedential value and did not substantively assist in arriving at a fit and proportionate sentence in this case.
 

 Finally, while we recognize that the weighing of relevant factors is within the purview of the sentencing judge, we conclude the sentencing judge overemphasized various aggravating factors in arriving at the lengthy sentence imposed. For example, the characterization of this offence as “prolonged” was questionable and the fact that there were multiple complainants was already accounted for in the appellant’s guilty plea to more than one offence. Where various factors were found aggravating, insufficient weight was given to this young appellant’s guilty pleas, prevalent Gladue factors, and his commendable post-offence rehabilitation efforts.
 

 In sum, we conclude that over and under-emphasis of relevant factors amounted to an error in principle which had a material impact on the sentence imposed and led to a disproportionate and unfit sentence. 

 V.



Conclusion
 

 The appeal is allowed. The appellant’s sentence is amended to six months consecutive on each offence, for a global sentence of one year. There is to be no variation of the collateral orders.
 
 
 

 Given the Crown’s concession, and our view that the interests of justice are not served by ordering the appellant’s return to custody, there will be no order for the appellant’s surrender into custody. The amended sentence is stayed.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/ca/2023abca11.html
 



Timothy Lundle appeals his conviction of January 13, 2022 that he committed a sexual assault in June or July, 2020 contrary to s 271, Criminal Code, RSC 1985, c C-46. His sole ground of appeal is ineffective assistance of counsel, and to prove that ground he seeks to admit new evidence.
 



For the reasons below, the new evidence application is dismissed, and the appeal is dismissed.

 II.



Facts
 



At the time of trial, Mr Lundle was 61 and the complainant was 58 years of age. They had known each other since he was 19 and she was 16, and had an established sexual relationship. 
 



On a night in June or July 2020, Mr Lundle called the complainant and asked her to come to his house. She said she was not feeling well but eventually agreed to come over. They talked for about an hour, when she told him again she did not feel well and needed to lie down. She lay down on a mattress in his living room.
 



The complainant’s evidence was that about ten minutes later Mr Lundle got on top of her and forced her to have non-consensual sex, during which she told him twice to stop and said he was hurting her.
 



When the sex was over, she got up crying and went to the bathroom to clean up. When she returned to the living room, Mr Lundle was asleep.
 



After the incident, the complainant and Mr Lundle continued to see each other and discussed the alleged assault on several occasions. She reported the incident to the police in February 2021 and an information was laid on March 24, 2021.
 III.



Decision of the Trial Judge
 



Trial proceeded for one day on December 23, 2021 before a Provincial Court judge and reasons for conviction were delivered January 13, 2022. 
 



In his reasons, the trial judge reviewed the requirements for the actus reus and mens rea of sexual assault as set out in R v Barton, 2019 SCC 33, paras 89-90, 2 SCR 579. He reviewed the test in R v W(D), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), 1 SCR 742, 758, 63 CCC (3d) 397, as Mr Lundle testified in his own defence. The trial judge said he did not believe Mr Lundle and nothing in his evidence or other evidence raised a reasonable doubt in his mind. He said Mr Lundle was evasive, gave ever-changing evidence, conceded he did not remember the night in question, and his evidence was unclear, inconsistent, and contradictory. The trial judge said the complainant’s evidence was clear, concise, and consistent throughout. He found her evidence credible and reliable, and said “In short, I believe her”.
 

 On whether he should negatively weigh the continued relationship post-event in assessing the complainant’s credibility, the trial judge said it would be wrong to assume what was normal or expected behaviour of a stereotypical victim of sexual assault and make findings of credibility on that basis. He also placed no weight on the delay in complaint to the police; he accepted the complainant’s explanation that she had been friends with Mr Lundle for most of her life, trusted him, enjoyed their relationship, was in shock this had happened, and had raised the incident with him several times between when it occurred and when she decided to go to the police.
 

 The trial judge did not accept the defence of honest but mistaken belief in communicated consent on the basis there were no words or actions of the complainant that could give rise to an honest but mistaken belief, and the defence of a routine or typical consent in their relationship offended the twin myths with respect to consent; see R v Goldfinch, 2019 SCC 38, paras 34, 44, 45, 60, 62, 106, 119, 3 SCR 3.
 IV.



Ground of Appeal and Standard of Review
 

 Mr Lundle advances only a single ground of appeal: ineffective assistance of counsel. However, he points to five indicators of that ineffective assistance:
(1)
failure to advise of and seek instructions regarding the possibility of election for judge and jury;
(2)
failure to advise of the right to not testify in his own defence;
(3)
failure to bring a s 276 application to examine on previous sexual activity;
(4)
failure to adduce evidence of motive to fabricate; and
(5)
ineffective cross-examination.
 

 Technically there is no standard of review, as Mr Lundle has not asked this Court to review the decision of the trial judge.
 

 However, Mr Lundle must establish the facts upon which his claim is based; that the assistance of counsel was deficient (the performance component); and this deficiency produced prejudice to an extent that constituted a miscarriage of justice: s 686(1)(a)(iii) of the Criminal Code, either by breach of procedural fairness or where the trial’s result is compromised (the prejudice component). There is a presumption in favour of trial counsel’s competence in respect of decisions made at trial and the actions of defence counsel are assessed against a reasonableness standard, with reference to the circumstances of this case at the time of trial and without benefit of hindsight: R v Sauverwald, 2020 ABCA 388, paras 15-18, 394 CCC (3d) 516; R v GDB, 2000 SCC 22, paras 26-29, 1 SCR 520; R v White, 2022 SCC 7, para 6, 411 CCC (3d) 419.
 V.




New Evidence Application
 

 Mr Lundle applies to admit new evidence on appeal pursuant to s 683(1)(a) of the Criminal Code and the well-known principles in Palmer v The Queen, 1979 CanLII 8 (SCC), 1 SCR 759, 775, 106 DLR (3d) 212 and R v Lévesque, 2000 SCC 47, paras 1, 14-22, 2 SCR 487:
(1)
the evidence should generally not be admitted if, by due diligence, it could have been adduced at trial, provided that this general principle will not be applied as strictly in a criminal case as in civil cases;
(2)
the evidence must be relevant in the sense that it bears upon a decisive or potentially decisive issue in the trial;
(3)
the evidence must be credible in the sense that it is reasonably capable of belief; and
(4)
it must be such that if believed it could reasonably, when taken with the other evidence adduced at trial, be expected to have affected the result.
 

 The overriding consideration in application of these principles must be “the interests of justice”: Palmer, 775; Lévesque, paras 14, 17.
 

 In accordance with the procedure set out in R v Stolar, 1988 CanLII 65 (SCC), 1 SCR 480, 491-492, 40 CCC (3d) 1, we reserved our decision on the new evidence application and considered it with the appeal.
 

 The fresh evidence proposed to be admitted by Mr Lundle is his affidavit sworn August 15, 2022. It speaks to his conversations with trial defence counsel and in particular, his established consensual sexual relationship with the complainant, the fact that he could not recall the exact particulars of the incident in question, a particular explanation for a motive to fabricate by the complainant, the advice obtained post-trial about the necessity for a s 276 application to question on prior sexual activity, his right to have selected trial by judge and jury, and his right to stay silent during the trial. Mr Lundle waived privilege to allow his trial counsel to provide a response to his affidavit, which counsel did in a reply affidavit of October 14, 2022.
 

 Originally, Mr Lundle had also applied to admit the affidavit of his appellate counsel’s assistant reviewing trial counsel’s telephone responses to the allegations in the Lundle affidavit. However, in oral submissions he withdrew that application and the Court does not consider the affidavit in these reasons. It is not before the Court.
 

 It is clear that the proposed fresh evidence could not have been introduced before the trial judge, as it arose out of the allegation of ineffective assistance of counsel before and during the trial. The evidence is relevant to the allegation, as it bears upon the carriage of the trial. It is credible in the sense that it is reasonably capable of belief. As Mr Lundle’s sole ground of appeal is ineffective assistance of counsel, review of counsel’s conduct leading up to and during the trial is required, and may be potentially determinative. 
 

 The issue before this Court is whether Mr Lundle has suffered a miscarriage of justice which requires the proffered new evidence to be admitted in the interests of justice. In that regard, the proffered new evidence is received and considered below to determine whether it should be admitted into evidence.
 VI.



Analysis
(1)
Failure to advise and seek instructions regarding the possibility of election for judge and jury 
 

 In considering the issue of trial election, a miscarriage of justice may occur if an accused is not given the opportunity to make an informed election: R v Trought, 2021 ONCA 379, para 44, 156 OR (3d) 481. However, the accused, in most cases, must establish more than the loss of choice: White, para 7.
 

 In his affidavit, Mr Lundle says he was never given a choice to be tried in the Court of Queen’s Bench (now King’s Bench) by judge and jury, and he never discussed with trial counsel the pros and cons of trial by judge alone in Provincial Court or in the Court of Queen’s Bench with or without a jury. Additionally, he says had he been properly informed, he would have and still would choose to be tried by judge and jury.
 

 During cross-examination on affidavit, Mr Lundle reconfirmed that he did not know about the ability to have his trial heard before a judge and jury. He was aware of jury trials, but assumed they were only for “high-profile” matters involving celebrities. However, he did have several meetings and telephone conversations with trial counsel during counsel’s retainer and in preparation for trial. He called his trial counsel immediately on arrest. He said he knew his trial counsel handled criminal matters in Mayerthorpe, and that “he knew me -- the best”. He was also advised that trial counsel would be retiring at the end of the year and that if this matter was not heard before then, he would have to find a different lawyer.
 

 Mr Lundle agreed he wanted this charge to be dealt with “as quickly as possible” because it was causing him “a lot of stress”.
 

 A number of exhibits were put to Mr Lundle in cross-examination on affidavit. With respect to a letter of March 22, 2021 from trial counsel, he acknowledged he had been advised it was uncertain what trial counsel’s fees would be; that needed to “be determined by the steps taken and the length and location of trial”. The letter went on to say that “Assuming a trial of 1/2 day at the Provincial Court House in Mayerthorpe”, trial counsel’s normal fees would be $5,000.
 

 In a second letter of May 19, 2021, trial counsel advised Mr Lundle that “once we determine how we are going to proceed with this matter, I will be in a better position to advise you as to what I anticipate my legal fees will be”. 
 

 There was a telephone call between trial counsel and Mr Lundle on May 19, but Mr Lundle does not recollect the content of that conversation. He confirmed there were “a few conversations by phone”, and that trial counsel checked in with him to make sure he agreed with how the matter was progressing. He said “I trusted him that he would handle everything ... I felt good about having him as a lawyer”. 
 

 In a further letter of May 31, 2021, trial counsel confirmed he had “attended in Provincial Court on [Mr Lundle’s behalf] by way of Webex on Thursday May 27, 2021”, the Crown had proceeded by way of indictment, and “as per your instructions an election of Provincial Court Judge and a plea of not guilty was entered”. Mr Lundle said however he did not recall giving specific instructions as to how the matter was to proceed and he did not know “why he worded it like that”. The transcript of the May 27, 2021 appearance shows that trial counsel represented to the court: “I do have instructions from Mr. Lundle to enter an election of Provincial Court Judge and a plea of not guilty”.
 

 The signed Appointment of Counsel by Designation states that the accused is required to appear in person whenever evidence is heard, jurors are selected, or for any sentencing decision. Mr Lundle does remember that document but not a specific conversation about it.
 

 Trial counsel confirmed that he had acted for Mr Lundle on a prior matrimonial matter and a prior criminal matter, but neither had gone to trial. He indicated he did not have specific recollection of the details of conversations between himself and Mr Lundle, nor did he have written notes on his file that outlined those discussions. He did however say that he had some specific recollections. 
 

 Trial counsel indicated in his affidavit he was “certain that this was discussed”, referring to the mode of election. He said he was “certain in [his] mind” because it was his invariable practice to have that discussion. He said he would have had those conversations in person because that was his normal practice: “in each case that I’m involved in it involved advising a client of an election. Basically I know what … steps I would normally take”. However, he said Mr Lundle “wanted the matter dealt with”, felt comfortable with him as trial counsel, and “wanted [him] to handle the matter”.
 

 Trial counsel did specifically advise Mr Lundle that he was planning on retiring at the end of 2021 and he “needed to ensure that [Mr Lundle] did not want a trial in the Court of Queen’s Bench”. He advised Mr Lundle that if the matter was to proceed in the Court of Queen’s Bench it would take “perhaps up to a year before the matter gets to trial”. He said:
I advised him if the matter was to proceed in the Court of Queen’s Bench, I would not be prepared to handle the matter, and that I would be prepared to make a recommendation as to other counsel. He indicated to me that he wanted me to handle the matter … he wanted to get it dealt with as quickly as possible.
 

 Trial counsel said specifically: “he instructed me at the end to proceed by Provincial Court”. On December 23, 2021, at the commencement of trial, he confirmed both a Provincial Court election and that the matter was set for that day. Mr Lundle was present and did not object to that confirmation.
 

 The submission for Mr Lundle essentially discounted as valueless the reference by trial counsel to his standard practice. While a trial judge may choose not to rely on standard practice evidence, it is clear such circumstantial evidence is not axiomatically inadmissible. In R v Watson (1996), 1996 CanLII 4008 (ON CA), 108 CCC (3d) 310, 324-325, 30 OR (3d) 161 (CA), the Court said: 
Where a person’s conduct in given circumstances is in issue, evidence that the person repeatedly acted in a certain way when those circumstances arose in the past has been received as circumstantial evidence that the person acted in conformity with past practice on the occasion in question…Evidence of habit involves an inference of conduct on a given occasion based on an established pattern of past conduct. It is an inference of conduct from conduct.…Evidence of habit proceeds on the basis that repeated conduct in a given situation is a reliable predictor of conduct in that situation.
 

 In addition, we note these cases reflecting how standard or systematic practice, or evidenced contradictions to it, can operate as circumstantial evidence: Kerr v Creighton, 2008 BCCA 75, para 24, 9 WWR 463; R v Shams, 2017 MBCA 116 paras 5-6; R v Tomashewsky, 1983 ABCA 52, para 1, 19 MVR 165; R v McGuire, BCJ No 1209 (QL), para 6 (CA); R v Cunningham, 2006 ABCA 345, paras 4-5, 401 AR 35; R v Thompson (2001), 2001 CanLII 24186 (ON CA), 151 CCC (3d) 339, paras 7-9, 52 OR (3d) 779 (CA); Dickie v Minett, 2014 ONCA 265, para 4. As exemplified in Dickie, such evidence is common with experts and other professional witnesses.
 

 Standard practice is also the foundation for much of the common law and statute respecting the admission of documentary evidence: see Kon Construction Ltd v Terranova Developments Ltd, 2015 ABCA 249, paras 46-49, 387 DLR (4th) 623. In that context, the mere possibility of departure from standard practice or mere possibility of inadequacy of a standard practice does not defeat the common sense inference that the practice was followed. Nor does it make relevant the exploration of either possibility, absent some substantive reason: see R v Gubbins, 2018 SCC 44 paras 15, 46-51, 3 SCR 35. Counsel for Mr Lundle argued in effect that because trial counsel could not specifically recall some of what he said to Mr Lundle, trial counsel did not discuss those things with him. In light of the documents available to this Court, and Mr Lundle’s testimony on questioning, we are persuaded that trial counsel’s version is substantiated.
 

 On a balance of probabilities, it seems clear Mr Lundle was advised of his right to elect trial before a Provincial Court judge, or a Queen’s Bench judge, and in the latter case between judge alone, or judge and jury. This is reflected in the constellation of evidence, including the wording of the letters of March 22, May 19, and May 31, 2021, the Appointment of Counsel by Designation, trial counsel’s recollections, and representations to the court on May 27 and December 23, 2021. Mr Lundle says he did not receive that advice, but trial counsel has specific recollection that he did provide that advice, and it was his invariable practice to provide that advice. It is clear Mr Lundle wanted to proceed quickly, that he understood trial counsel would only be available until year end when he intended to retire, and that would necessitate an election for a Provincial Court trial in Mayerthorpe.
 

 This alleged indicator of ineffective assistance of counsel is dismissed.
(2)
Failure to advise of the right not to testify in his own defence
 

 The critical question in determining whether or not an accused should testify is “who made the decision?”, trial counsel or the accused: R v Archer (2005), 2005 CanLII 36444 (ON CA), 203 OAC 56, para 139, 202 CCC (3d) 60.
 

 Mr Lundle says he was not advised that he did not have to testify in his own defence. However, he agreed he wanted the opportunity to tell his side of the story. Trial counsel says he did advise Mr Lundle of his right to remain silent and that it would have been his invariable practice to do so. He said: “The decision to testify was something we discussed”.
 

 Counsel said he had “specific recollections” of this discussion:
I would have indicated to him that he does not have to take the stand, but I did indicate to him that in this instance, I saw this case as a he said/she said type of case, and I anticipated based upon the evidence that he would have to take the stand, and that was a great concern to me because I was concerned with whether or not Mr. Lundle would be a very effective witness.
 

 Trial counsel said he indicated to Mr Lundle that he did not have to testify but that it “may be in his best interests that he . . . testify”. He said: “we reviewed matters in great detail. I tried to prep him.”
 

 He confirmed he had no specific recollection of “when that conversation took place” but he specifically remembered “that I did advise him of that”, the right to remain silent. He said: “my normal practice is that I would do that, and in this instance I’m certain I would because like I say, I had real concerns about Mr. Lundle’s effectiveness as a witness”.
 

 Further, after the Crown’s case was closed, trial counsel said he believes they took a short adjournment to determine whether Mr Lundle was still prepared to testify. Trial counsel said the complainant came across as a convincing witness and he would have advised Mr Lundle that he thought it would be in his best interest to testify.
 

 It appears clear that a discussion did occur both before trial and after the closing of the Crown’s case about whether Mr Lundle should testify and the decision was made between trial counsel and Mr Lundle that he would do so.
 

 This alleged indicator of ineffective assistance of counsel is dismissed.
(3)
Failure to bring a s 276 application to explore evidence that the complainant had engaged in prior relevant sexual activity with the accused
 

 Mr Lundle says trial counsel opened his cross-examination by asking questions about prior sexual activity and the Crown objected on the basis that there had been no s 276 application. However, after discussions between counsel and with Mr Lundle, his trial counsel was able to cross-examine the complainant, confirming that she had been in a “boyfriend/girlfriend relationship” with Mr Lundle and they had discussed moving in together.
 

 Trial counsel advised that he did want to adduce evidence that Mr Lundle had been in a relationship with the complainant, but did not think it was necessary to bring a s 276 application for that purpose. He said this was “not a case where past conduct would inform the issue of consent or mistaken belief in consent”. He said the Crown was prepared to acknowledge that the complainant and Mr Lundle had been in a lengthy relationship. Counsel also said he was concerned Mr Lundle would not be found to be credible, as his position was that every sexual encounter with the complainant was the same and there was nothing that differentiated them in his mind, but that he could specifically remember the date of this encounter. Counsel said:
But the problem was ... he seemed to know the date she was referring to, which gave me cause for concern. How would he know the specific date when he hadn’t been confronted with this until several months after the alleged incident?
 

 Trial counsel determined that he “didn’t see anything to be gained by a Section 276 application” under those circumstances. This was a tactical decision by trial counsel, with knowledge of his client, in the circumstance of this case, and there is a presumption of trial counsel’s competence in making that decision: Sauverwald, paras 15-18; White, para 6.
 

 This alleged indicator of ineffective assistance of counsel is dismissed.
(4)
Failure to adduce evidence of motive to fabricate
 

 Mr Lundle says that because there had been no s 276 application, there was no opportunity for trial counsel to adduce evidence that the complainant would have motive to fabricate. He says he has erectile dysfunction at times and had been unable to perform on a number of occasions with the complainant. He also says that he had taken medication and it did not help. Mr Lundle says the complainant was unhappy about that situation. She was also unhappy that she had caught him viewing pornography, using a dating app, and inviting his son to live with him which frustrated her plan to move in with him. After that, the complainant was “furious” and the relationship “got a lot worse”. He says all of this led the complainant to threaten him with a sexual assault complaint if he did not abide by her demands in the relationship.
 

 Trial counsel did, however, ask questions in cross-examination of the complainant to point to animus, including that she was jealous or upset because Mr Lundle had broken off their relationship. For example, during cross-examination trial counsel was able to assert the complainant was angry at Mr Lundle “ever since he broke off his relationship with you”. He also cross-examined on her disappointment at not moving in with Mr Lundle, her anger at his calling the police when she threatened to commit suicide, and her repeated assertions that she would “charge him with something”.
 

 Additionally, trial counsel said one reason why Mr Lundle wanted to testify was “to put his evidence of the complainant’s motive to fabricate before the court”. He said “Mr Lundle wanted the court to know what he believed motivated this allegation against him”. Mr Lundle did testify and did put this defence into evidence.
 

 This alleged indicator of ineffective assistance of counsel is dismissed.
(5)
Ineffective cross-examination
 

 The allegation of ineffective cross-examination reflects both the issues of absence of a s 276 application and effective cross-examination on motive to fabricate. Specifically, Mr Lundle complains there was no cross-examination on text messages provided by the complainant to the police. He suggests the text messages would show he was extremely upset at the time of the complaint because he believed it to be false and motivated by the complainant’s jealousy, her concern over his viewing pornography, and the use of a dating app.
 

 However, trial counsel did cross-examine on the text messages. They were marked as exhibit A for identification at that point, later exhibit 1 on the cross-examination of Mr Lundle. The complainant denied ever having sent these messages. 
 

 Mr Lundle was also concerned that there was no cross-examination on the bruising shown in certain photographs, since the complainant admitted to him she did not take the pictures at the time of the assault but much later after the “bruises came back”. He says trial counsel did not obtain the metadata of the images provided nor explore whether the complainant had lied to the police about when the images were taken. He says failure to cross-examine on those messages fell below a reasonable standard of competence and created prejudice to him that could reasonably be perceived to have caused a miscarriage of justice.
 

 However, the photographs were never mentioned at trial, they were not marked as an exhibit, and there was no benefit, and possibly a significant risk, in raising photographs of bruising that were not otherwise before the trial judge.
 

 This alleged indicator of ineffective assistance of counsel is dismissed.
VII.



Conclusion
 

 Each of the alleged indicators of ineffective assistance of counsel is without merit. Mr Lundle has suffered no miscarriage of justice, there has been no breach of procedural fairness, and the trial result was not compromised. It is not in the interests of justice that the proffered new evidence be admitted. In light of this decision, the proffered new evidence remains sealed.
 

 The application to admit new evidence is dismissed. The appeal is dismissed.
 

 At the conclusion of oral submissions, the Court reserved decision and determined that the terms of Mr Lundle’s consent judicial interim release pending appeal would continue, except that paragraph 4(e) would be amended to require that he surrender in accordance with the directions of this Court. This Court now directs that Mr Lundle surrender himself to the Edmonton Remand Centre within 48 hours of release of these reasons for decision.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/ca/2023abca18.html
 



The appellant, Urthurton Phiri, appeals his ten-month sentence after trial, for fraud over $5000. The appellant was also sentenced to 24 months probation and a restitution order jointly with his co-accused, in the amount of $15,000.
 



The appellant’s co-accused, Sebulelo Moeketsi, was sentenced to 6 months incarceration, and a similar probation term. The appellant argues that the sentencing judge erred in failing to properly apply the parity principle, and in her treatment of aggravating and mitigating factors.
 



The fraud took place over the course of two to three days in the complainant’s taxi and much of the incident was captured on video though a dash camera. The complainant was led to believe that Ms Moeketsi was dealing in precious gemstones and selling them through a middleman, the appellant. Ms Moeketsi (“Wanda” in the scheme), the appellant (“Lucky”), and a third party, “Martin” (who was never located), acted out this business arrangement in the complainant’s presence. When an ostensible difficulty arose with the appellant being able to pay Ms Moeketsi a deposit, the appellant invited the complainant to invest in the business by financing the required $15,000; the appellant told the complainant he would receive a return on his investment of half of the middleman’s commission fee. The complainant ultimately obtained money from his own and his wife’s savings to pay the deposit, including trips to two different banks on the suggestion of the appellant after his first withdrawal yielded only $10,000. Subsequently, the appellant and Ms Moeketsi disappeared, and the gems that the complainant had been provided as collateral were determined to be nothing more than landscaping rocks. 
 



At the hearing, the Crown sought a sentence of 8-12 months for the appellant; the defence submitted that 90 days intermittent was appropriate, followed by two years probation. 
 



The sentencing judge found that the fraud was a well-planned scheme dependent on each character’s role in the gem transaction. She found that the “moral culpability of each of [the] offenders is high”; the record did not disclose “serious financial pressure” faced by either accused outside of greed, and there did not appear to be “any remorse or hesitation in those who played their assigned roles”. “While Ms. Moeketsi did less and did not create a personal relationship between herself and [the complainant, like the appellant did], her responsibility is the same as Mr. Phiri’s. Without the role of Wanda, the scheme could not be complete.” 
 



As to the gravity of the offence, the sentencing judge found that fraud causes serious harm in our society and noted the complainant’s specific loss of work when he could not immediately return to driving his taxi having become distrustful of the public. She held: “cab drivers are in a vulnerable position vis-à-vis the conduct of their passengers... fraud undermines the foundations of the economy by reducing what I would describe as commercial trust among our citizens. This fraud is a devastating offence to the victim because it is basically a betrayal. . . [of] a budding friendship and commercial relationship.”
 



In sentencing the appellant to 10 months, she noted the appellant’s circumstances as a 40-year-old immigrant from Zimbabwe and a single father of two children. While trained as a massage therapist, the appellant’s health had been an issue for a number of years, causing him to rely on social assistance; family finances were “a struggle”. The appellant’s pre-sentence report was found to be generally positive, but the writer had concerns about the appellant’s limited support network and ability to manage his health and stress, and his lack of a plan to return to work. The appellant also had a criminal record consisting of four offences of impaired driving, unlawful possession of identity documents, and breach of a driving prohibition, all between 2010-2019.
 



In dealing specifically with the difference between the appellant’s 10-month sentence and the lesser six-month sentence imposed on his co-accused, the sentencing judge found as follows:
. . . I have concluded that the difference in the length of the jail sentences to be imposed is justified on the facts of the case. Ms. Moeketsi’s shorter period in jail is explained by the fact that she has no record and did not build up the personal relationship with the victim. Mr. Phiri’s slightly longer period in jail is explained by the fact that he has [an escalating] record, he chose the victim, and he took the larger role in creating the relationship, which he ultimately betrayed, with the victim. He also encouraged the victim to go to many banks to avoid bank rules limiting the sum of money a client could withdraw in one day, rules enacted in order to prevent this type of fraud.
She further noted that another “powerful” mitigating factor in Ms Moeketsi’s favour was that she “support[s] and cares for her [four] children”; no similar mitigation was found related to the appellant’s role as a single father.
 



On appeal, the appellant submits that the 4-month discrepancy in sentence between him and his co-accused was not justified in the circumstances of this case. The appellant urges that while a modest elevation in sentence was warranted to account for his record, the additional four months imposed was a marked and unwarranted difference justifying appellate intervention. 
 

 The issue therefore is whether the sentencing judge committed an error in principle that had a material impact on the sentence imposed such that this Court should step in and particularly, lower the appellant’s sentence to be more in keeping with the six-month sentence imposed on his co-accused. More specifically, the appellant argues that the sentencing judge failed to give due weight to the principle of parity between the two offenders by erring as follows: 
a)

finding the appellant’s more extensive role with the complainant justified a longer sentence; 
b)

finding that the appellant encouraged the complainant to subvert bank transaction limits;
c)

failing to give due consideration to the appellant’s family circumstances which was otherwise found to be a mitigating factor for his co-accused, and;
d)

misapprehending the Crown’s position on sentence to be 12-18 months, rather than the requested 8-12 months.
Lastly, the appellant argues that that trial judge erred in finding that the appellant’s maturity and the fact that the complainant was a taxi driver, were aggravating factors.
 

In its narrow sense, parity can mean that equivalent co-offenders should receive equivalent sentences, or that differently situated co-offenders should receive sentences that rationally reflect their differences. However, while parity must be considered, it is not an overriding principle; the sentencing process is by its very nature, an individualized process. In R v LM, 2008 SCC 31 at para 36, 2 SCR 163, the Supreme Court of Canada held that even for offences of a same type, the “principle of parity does not preclude disparity where warranted by the circumstances” (emphasis in original). “There will, of course, be cases where the circumstances of the co-accused are sufficiently different to warrant significantly different sentences, such as where one co-accused has a lengthy related criminal record or played a much greater role in the commission of the offence”: R v Christie, 2004 ABCA 287 at para 19. In a broader sense, the “question is always whether the sentence reflects the gravity of the offence, the offender’s degree of responsibility, and the unique circumstances of each case”: R v Parranto, 2021 SCC 46 at para 12, 463 DLR (4th) 389. 
 

 In this case, the sentencing judge found that the appellant played a larger and more prolonged role in the deception and ultimate defrauding of the complainant. These findings were open to the sentencing judge and together with the appellant’s prior record, warranted the disparity in sentencing as between the appellant and his co-accused in the circumstances of this case. As the appellant has acknowledged, an elevation in sentence was to be expected given his record and, in our view, the additional four months is not of such a “marked” difference or disparity from his co-accused that appellate intervention is required.
 

 The sentencing judge was further entitled to find that the appellant was aware the complainant withdrew the daily limit of funds from his bank account, and notwithstanding, pressed the complainant to make up the would-be shortfall by going to another bank. We are also not satisfied the complainant’s occupation as a taxi driver was irrelevant; rather, it was the complainant’s exposure in his employment capacity that the appellant and his co-accused exploited to facilitate the fraud. The sentencing judge never equated the complainant’s vulnerability in these circumstances to that of experiencing violence at the hands of a passenger; however, she was not wrong to conclude that “cab drivers are in a vulnerable position vis-à-vis the conduct of their passengers... fraud undermines the foundations of the economy by reducing what I would describe as commercial trust among our citizens.” This was indeed the experience of the complainant (and his family) in this matter.
 

 Moreover, we conclude the while the sentencing judge may have wrongly stated the Crown’s position on sentence as that of 12-18 months in her reasons, this appears to be nothing more than a misstatement. As to the balance of the appellant’s submissions, while a different judge may have weighed aggravating and mitigating factors differently or the evidence itself, we do not find that she made any error in principle in weighing these factors that had a material impact on the sentence imposed. The co-accused was similarly found to be a mature offender, and any collateral consideration of her parenting situation did not yield to a substantially lower sentence.
 

 In sum, the sentence was demonstrably fit and there is no basis for appellate intervention. 
 

 The appellant was granted bail pending this appeal. We acknowledge and agree with the Crown’ submission that it is not in the interests of justice to reincarcerate the appellant; there will therefore be no surrender order.
 

 The appeal is dismissed.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/ca/2023abca23.html
 



The deceased was brutally hacked and beaten to death. At trial, the appellant put forward the theory that he did not participate in the killing, but rather intervened as it was occurring. The trial judge, sitting without a jury, convicted the appellant of second-degree murder in relation to the killing. The appellant’s brother pleaded guilty to manslaughter on an earlier occasion for his involvement in the killing. 
 



The appellant raises one ground of appeal. He argues the trial judge erred in allowing the Crown to cross-examine him on the testimony he was compelled by subpoena to provide in his brother’s preliminary inquiry contrary to s 13 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
 



The record supports the conclusion that the Crown sought to cross-examine the appellant on his preliminary inquiry testimony to test his credibility. The Crown told the trial judge the purpose of cross-examination on the preliminary hearing transcript was to highlight some of the inconsistencies between the appellant’s evidence at trial and his evidence as a witness in his brother’s preliminary inquiry. 
 



The appellant’s trial counsel opposed the cross-examination, arguing that the proffered evidence was not inconsistent or, if it was, it was not only relevant to the appellant’s credibility, but also served to incriminate him.
 



The appellant now argues that because some of the evidence he gave at the preliminary inquiry was incriminating, the evidence in its entirety ought to have been protected and excluded from cross-examination at trial. Instead, he argues, the trial judge parsed the evidence into incriminating and non-incriminating evidence and permitted the Crown to cross-examine on the latter. He argues the trial judge erred in applying R v Nedelcu, 2012 SCC 59, 3 SCR 311 and allowing the Crown’s cross-examination where, in the circumstances of this case, it has no application.
 



The appellant further argues that even if Nedelcu were properly applied, the evidence in question was nevertheless incriminating and the trial judge ought not to have permitted the Crown to cross-examine on it. He argues that the curative proviso cannot be applied, and that a new trial must be ordered to ensure fair trial process.
 



In our view, the trial judge correctly applied the law in Nedelcu and correctly determined that the evidence in question was not incriminating. 
2.

Factual Background
 



The offending evidence in this case relates to the appellant’s memory about his shirt – where he took it off and where he left it. That he took it off was not in dispute.
 



At his brother’s preliminary inquiry, the appellant testified he did not remember where he took off his shirt. At his trial, the trial judge stated that “[a]t the very least, [the appellant] provided increased detail in his trial testimony. He had moved from a lack of recollection to a potential recollection of the shirt’s location”.[1]
 

 The specific passages of concern are found at paras 614-618:
Location of Mr. Soosay’s Shirt
In this trial, Mr. Soosay said that he took off his shirt in the middle of the kitchen and dining room area. He put it on the table. About putting the shirt on the table, he said he was “pretty sure,” that’s where “I know I think I took it off.” But he was sure that he was in the kitchen and dining room area.
In the PS Preliminary Inquiry, Mr. Soosay had testified that he did not remember where he had taken off his shirt. 
At the very least, Mr. Soosay provided increased detail in his trial testimony. He had moved from a lack of recollection to a potential recollection of the shirt’s location.
On the level of what actually happened, Mr. Soosay doubtless took his shirt off upstairs before he fled from the house. Emily said he wasn’t wearing a shirt, so he didn’t have it on [in] the basement. The bloodstains on the kitchen table could make the kitchen a reasonable location for taking off the shirt, although other parts of the main floor could not be excluded. 
This reflection, though, is beside the point of the change in his testimony and specifically the difference between his trial testimony and PS Preliminary Inquiry testimony.
 

 While the trial judge briefly considered what might be said about where the appellant removed his shirt, he quickly discounted that evidence. He expressly stated that in so far as he was concerned, the significance in the appellant’s evidence was the difference between the preliminary inquiry and trial evidence. 
 

The trial judge went on at para 624 to say:
The Materiality of the Inconsistencies
None of the inconsistencies concern a material fact. None concerns the unfolding of the attack on Mr. Nepoose or material features of Mr. Soosay’s pre- or post-attack conduct. None concerns exculpatory facts. Whether others used drugs or Ms. Ward used the mop, whether Mr. Soosay remembered or didn’t remember where he put his shirt are ancillary details. Nothing turns on these matters. This is true, but this does not negate the corrosive effect of inconsistencies on his testimony. If Mr. Soosay cannot be trusted on small or ancillary issues, the concern is that he cannot be trusted on more important issues.
This followed the trial judge’s caution to himself that the appellant “is presumed innocent and an innocent person must be entitled to testify without his words being filtered through a prejudgment of falsehood”: para 576. The trial judge recognized that doing so would amount to “a presumption of guilt”: para 576.
 


The trial judge then went on to consider inconsistencies in the evidence given at trial and in the other available evidence, with a view to assessing the credibility and reliability of the appellant’s evidence. 
3.

Decision
 

 Cross-examining to incriminate is distinct from cross-examining to impeach credibility. The majority in Nedelcu highlights that distinction and clearly states that only incriminating evidence will trigger s 13 protection; s 13 is not triggered simply by compelled evidence of “any kind” nor does it extend protection to non-incriminating evidence: Nedelcu at para 29. “Incriminating evidence" is "something ‘from which a trier of fact may infer that an accused is guilty of the crime charged'": Nedelcu at para 29, citing R v Henry, 2005 SCC 76 at para 25, 3 SCR 609. Discerning (i.e., “parsing”) whether evidence in a prior proceeding meets that threshold and is “incriminating” in the above sense is not unusual in criminal trials.
 


The appellant’s evidence about his shirt was similar to the evidence discussed in Nedelcu, where the accused had no memory of specific events at the preliminary inquiry but recalled those same events in detail at the trial. In this case, at the preliminary inquiry, the appellant did not recall where he left his shirt. At his trial, the appellant had a significantly enriched memory about the shirt. The trial judge did not find evidence about the shirt to be material. It did not factor into his analysis beyond the stated concern – if the appellant was not consistent on minor, less relevant, or irrelevant details, the trial judge may not be able to trust him on more important issues. 
 

 In our view, the trial judge correctly stated and applied the law. Section 13 is directed at the use of earlier evidence after its character has been assessed in the proceeding in which a party seeks to use it. The trial judge was careful to consider the impugned evidence considering s 13 and its stated purpose. His reasons for allowing the evidence are found at para 602:
[…]
• 
 s. 13 applies to a witness who was “compelled” to testify in prior proceedings; Mr. Soosay was subpoenaed to testify in the PS Preliminary Inquiry and his trial is an “other proceeding” within the meaning of s. 13.
•
s. 13 does not immunize from cross-examination on all evidence given in the prior proceeding (it is not a “blanket” immunity).
•
s. 13 does immunize from having “incriminating evidence” given in the prior proceeding used to “incriminate that witness” in the subsequent proceeding.
•
“the time for determining whether the evidence given at the prior proceeding may properly be characterized as ‘incriminating evidence’ is the time when the Crown seeks to use it at the subsequent hearing:” Nedelcu at para 16.
• 
 “incriminating evidence” is evidence that the Crown could use, if permitted, to prove guilt, evidence that could be used to prove or to assist in proving an essential element of the charged offence: Nedelcu at paras 9, 10.
• 
 evidence that could be used only for the purpose of causing the trier of fact to reject an accused’s trial testimony does not, by itself, create “incriminating evidence” for the Crown (rejected evidence is not evidence of guilt): Nedelcu at paras 21-23.
•
hence, the use for the purpose of impeachment alone of non-incriminatory evidence given in the prior proceeding is not forbidden by s. 13: Nedelcu at para 25.
• 
 […] cross-examination of Mr. Soosay by the Crown respecting the areas of Mr. Soosay’s PS Preliminary Inquiry testimony I permitted did not allow the Crown to use “incriminating evidence.” The evidence did not concern the facts material to the charge faced by Mr. Soosay and his defence to that charge, and was relevant for purposes of impeachment only.
 

 In any event, on the record that is before this Court, even if the trial judge wrongly characterized the disputed evidence as non-incriminating, the result would have been the same given the very limited role this evidence played in his overall reasoning process. The trial judge gave numerous other reasons to support his finding that the Crown had met its burden. For example, he found that the appellant’s account of the blood distribution relied on too many unlikely coincidences to have any plausibility. The trial judge’s other reasons were not challenged. 
 

 We agree with the Crown that the quantity and probity of the Crown’s evidence was so overwhelming that notwithstanding the error alleged, the trial judge would not have accepted the appellant’s account of his involvement in the killing and would have convicted him.
 

 Further, we agree with the Crown that the inconsistencies that eroded the appellant’s credibility and reliability came from sources other than his testimony in the preliminary inquiry, namely: inconsistencies between his testimony at trial and his police interview, inconsistencies internal to his testimony, and inconsistencies between his testimony and other evidence in the trial. 
 

 Following the above, we conclude that there is no substantial wrong or miscarriage of justice in this case.
 

 The appeal is dismissed.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/ca/2023abca2.html
 



This is an application for judicial interim release pending a sentence appeal pursuant to s. 679(4) of the Criminal Code. 
 



The applicant originally filed an appeal of both his conviction and sentence related to a break and enter with intent to commit an indictable offence, use of a firearm while committing an indictable offence, and pointing a firearm. He pleaded guilty to possession of a firearm without a license and possession of a prohibited weapon without a license. He received a global sentence of seven years penitentiary time less 645 days of pre-trial credit.
 



The applicant was denied legal aid coverage for the conviction appeal but obtained it for his sentence appeal. The applicant seeks judicial interim release pending his sentence appeal. However, the conviction appeal is proceeding, and counsel on this application advised that he has instructions to apply for state-funded counsel to be appointed for the conviction appeal, though that application has not yet been made.
 



After some discussion, the applicant decided to proceed with his application for judicial interim release on the sentence appeal while the issues with respect to the conviction appeal remain outstanding. Frankly, this seems to put the cart before the horse. In any event, I will address the application before me.
II.
 Analysis
 



The test for judicial interim release on a sentence appeal is harder to satisfy than on a conviction appeal. Section 679(4) of the Criminal Code requires an applicant to establish:
(a)




the appeal has sufficient merit that, in the circumstances, it would cause unnecessary hardship if the applicant were detained in custody;
(b)




the applicant will surrender himself into custody in accordance with the terms of the order; and 
(c)




his detention is not necessary in the public interest.
 



It is the first element that is different. It is more onerous than for a conviction appeal which requires that an appeal not be frivolous: s. 679(3). Sufficient merit means “arguable merit”: R v Ewanchuk, 2000 ABCA 303 at paras 5-6.
 



The applicant raises three grounds of appeal which must be evaluated under the first branch of the test.
 



First, the applicant argues the finding that the firearm was loaded at the time of the assault was in error. The sentencing judge did not accept the applicant’s evidence when he testified. This is a high threshold to overcome.
 



Second, the applicant submits that the sentencing judge relied on R v Matwiy, 1996 ABCA 63 which is the starting point case on sentencing for home invasions. While the sentencing judge said he was not following that case, the applicant submits his analysis was shaped and bound by Matwiy resulting in an overreliance on legal principles not applicable on the facts. The sentencing judge clearly distinguished Matwiy and explained why he did not think it governed sentencing in this case. However, the sentencing judge did find that the offence had elements of a home invasion. The applicant argues he would not call the incident a home invasion but did not say what it should be called. Yet, the applicant snuck into the victim’s home and hid with a duffel bag containing a loaded firearm, ammunition, knives, a pair of black gloves, and a roll of duct tape. It was unclear how long he was in the house, but likely for several hours while the victim’s adult child was home and while her school-aged child was picked up by the victim’s in-laws to go to school. When the victim came home and entered her bedroom, the applicant emerged from the ensuite bathroom, pushed the victim down on the bed, placed his gloved hand on her mouth and pointed a loaded firearm at her head. The sentencing judge referred to these facts in coming to his conclusion that the offence had elements of a home invasion.
 

 Third, the applicant asserts that the sentencing judge misidentified or misapplied aggravating and mitigating factors which are errors in principle. Specifically, he argues the sentencing judge double counted the use of the firearm considering it an aggravating factor and failed to consider mitigating factors contained in the pre-sentence report. It is a high threshold to overcome for review on appeal.
 

 To succeed, the sufficient merit of the appeal must be evaluated in the context of the potential unnecessary hardship if the applicant were to remain in custody. I find that the applicant does not meet this first branch of the test under s. 679(4). To show unnecessary hardship, the applicant must establish that the appeal has sufficient merit that, if judicial interim release is not granted, he will have spent more time in custody than that subsequently determined to be fit: R v Figiel, 2015 ABCA 19 at para 10. No special hardship is claimed in this case, rather it is the risk of serving a sentence that is in excess of what should have been imposed. With the pre-trial credit, the applicant has five years remaining in his sentence. 
 

 While the Crown concedes the applicant will surrender himself into custody in accordance with the terms of the order, failure to satisfy the first branch of the test for judicial interim release pursuant to s. 679(4) is sufficient to dismiss the application. Accordingly, I need not assess whether detention is necessary in the public interest.
III. Conclusion
 

 The application for judicial interim release is dismissed. 
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/ca/2023abca3.html
 



The appellant appeals his conviction on a number of drug and weapons related charges. He did not appear on the date scheduled for the appeal and he failed to instruct his counsel relative to the appeal. The Crown further advises that the appellant failed to appear for sentencing and an arrest warrant was issued that remains outstanding. He did file a factum and the appeal has been perfected. Accordingly, the panel decided it would hear the appeal in the appellant’s absence as is permitted under r 14.32(3) of the Rules of Court.
 



The appellant argued at trial that police breached his s 8 and 9 Charter rights because police lacked reasonable suspicion to detain him. He argued further that absent his lawful detention, the search of his person was also unlawful. The trial judge found that police had reasonable suspicion to ground the appellant’s arrest and further that the search incidental to arrest was lawful. The appellant appeals these findings on grounds that even considering the constellation of factors the trial judge considered, they do not meet the well-known reasonable suspicion test. If the detention was unlawful so too was the search of the appellant’s person. We disagree.
 



The trial judge provided comprehensive and particularized fact findings and reasons for her decision: 2020 ABQB 793. She described the applicable legal principles consistently with what this Court later said in R v Julom, 2022 ABCA 198. The appellant does not argue the facts found were in error. Rather, only that they did not rise to the level of reasonable suspicion. 
 



Ultimately, the trial judge’s findings of fact are entitled to deference. After listing the factors that Constable Farrand testified aroused his suspicion and specifically recognizing that these factors must be considered together and not individually, she found Constable Farrand’s reasonable suspicion was based on objectively discernable facts. She also distinguished R v Le, 2019 SCC 34, 2 SCR 692, on grounds that events were unfolding for police in real time and the police would have been derelict in their duty had they not stopped the appellant. 
 



We discern no error in the trial judge’s conclusion the constellation of factors she articulated in paragraph 86 of her reasons and further discussed in paragraphs 89 to 94, objectively disclose there was a credibly based possibility the appellant was involved in the shooting and his detention did not breach s 9 of the Charter. It follows from the appellant’s arguments there was no breach of s 8 either.
 
 
 



The appeal is dismissed. 
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/ca/2023abca29.html
 



The appellant pleaded guilty to aggravated assault under s 268 of the Criminal Code, arising out of an unprovoked and vicious attack in which he slashed a machete into the neck of the complainant. He also pleaded guilty to a further count of breaching an undertaking given to a police officer not to be in possession of a weapon (s 145(5.1)). In a detailed written judgment, the sentencing judge concluded that the appellant was a dangerous offender pursuant to s 753(1) and imposed a sentence of penitentiary detention for an indeterminate period pursuant to s 753(4)(a) and (4.1): R v Runions, 2021 ABQB 67. 
 



The appellant does not dispute the finding that he was a dangerous offender but appeals his indeterminate sentence. 
 



The appeal is allowed for the reasons that follow.
II.
 Background Facts
 



The offence precipitating the dangerous offender designation and sentence occurred on July 20, 2017, after an unprovoked attack that likely would have been fatal but for the quick medical intervention of a bystander. At the time of the attack, the appellant was on judicial interim release and bound by the terms of an undertaking, which included a prohibition on possessing a weapon. 
 



The attack occurred after the appellant and an acquaintance met with the complainant and noticed he was wearing a gold chain. The appellant told the complainant he liked the chain and asked if he was interested in selling it. After the complainant said no and placed the chain in his pocket, the three men travelled a short distance together into an alley. In the alley, the complainant heard a firearm click and turned around to see the acquaintance brandishing an imitation gun and the appellant holding a large machete. Believing he would be robbed, the complainant attempted to move but the appellant quickly slashed the machete into the left side of his neck. The complainant ran down the back alley, yelling for help and tightly applying pressure to his neck. A passerby provided prompt medical assistance to stem the loss of blood. The complainant was transported to the hospital in life-threatening condition after losing two litres of blood. He immediately underwent surgery and received a blood transfusion. 
 



The stab wound was severe and life-threatening, and had a profound impact on the complainant, who was left with impaired facial functioning and had to relearn basic functions such as eating and speaking. It left a large scar on his face and neck, which serves as a constant visual reminder of the attack. He suffers from ongoing post-traumatic stress, fear, and sleeplessness. The attack was unprovoked and vicious. The complainant was unarmed, surprised, and believed he would die. 
 



In addition to the predicate offence, the appellant had several convictions between 2009 and 2018, among which were minor summary convictions such as mischief and theft under. However, the Crown relied on the following offences to establish a pattern of behaviour:

2008: assault, s 266 
2010: breaking and entering, s 348(1)
2012: assault, s 266 
2017 (July 1): aggravated assault, s 268
2017 (July 30): aggravated assault, s 268
2017 (July 20): aggravated assault, 268 (predicate offence)

Sentencing Decision
 



 The sentencing judge designated the appellant a dangerous offender and sentenced him to an indeterminate sentence.
 



The statutory scheme governing dangerous offender sentencing has two steps. First, the offender must be designated as a dangerous offender under s 753(1) of the Criminal Code. Second, the sentencing judge must determine the appropriate sentence under ss 753(4) and (4.1): R v Zoe, 2020 NWTCA 1 at para 20.
 

 The designation stage has both backward-looking and forward-looking components. The judge must look at the past behaviour of the offender and determine whether the conduct falls within ss 753(1)(a) or 753(1)(b) of the Criminal Code. These sections require that the underlying offence be a serious personal injury offence and the offender be a threat based on evidence:

of a pattern of repetitive behaviour and likelihood of death or injury to others if not restrained (s 753(1)(a)(i));
of a pattern of aggressive behaviour and a substantial degree of indifference to the reasonably foreseeable consequences of such behaviour (s 753(1)(a)(ii));
any brutal behaviour which indicates that the offender is unlikely to be inhibited by normal standards of behavioural restraint in the future (s 753(1)(a)(iii));
a pattern of sexual offences that demonstrates a failure to control sexual impulses in the past and the likelihood of causing injury, pain, or other evil through failure to control sexual impulses in the future (s 753(1)(b)).

(Zoe at para 26)
 

 Second, the sentencing judge must conduct a prospective assessment of dangerousness and risk. The judge must be satisfied that the offender “poses a high likelihood of harmful recidivism and that his or her conduct is intractable... meaning behaviour that the offender is unable to surmount”: R v Boutilier, 2017 SCC 64 at para 27. 
 

 Given the appellant’s past offences, including the predicate offence, the sentencing judge found there was a history of repetitive and increasingly violent behaviour that established a pattern under s 753(1)(a)(i). The appellant does not contest that finding. The sentencing judge noted that there was little to no provocation precipitating the appellant’s violent attacks. The sentencing judge was satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the pattern of repetitive aggressive behaviour involving a likelihood of death or injury, including the predicate offence, demonstrated a failure by the appellant to restrain his behaviour. There was a likelihood that this aggressive behaviour would continue in the future. 
 

 After looking backwards and establishing a pattern of behaviour involving a likelihood of death or injury, the sentencing judge turned to the inquiry of future risk and intractability. The prospective analysis requires the Crown to prove a likelihood the offender is a future threat to the life, safety or physical or mental well-being of others. 
 
 

 The sentencing judge found the appellant’s behaviour was intractable and there was a high likelihood he would cause death, injury, or severe psychological damage to other persons in the future. The judge came to this finding after reviewing viva voce and written evidence of Anika Tusun (probation officer), Alan Beasley (community parole officer), Laura Olsen (social worker), Deena Nessman (psychologist), Dr. Hashman (psychiatrist), Mercedes Garcia (institutional parole officer), Corrine Weeks (parole officer supervisor), Ashley Prairie Chicken (Gladue report writer), and Codie Stephan (Bowden Institution manager). While the sentencing judge thoroughly reviewed and outlined all the relevant evidence (see paras 152-520), he substantially relied on the evidence of Dr. Hashman and Ms. Nessman in reaching his designation conclusion. 
 

 Several factors led to the finding of intractability, including the appellant’s lack of candour and truthfulness. The sentencing judge found the appellant to be a "chronically unreliable narrator", making it impossible to assess whether treatment was effective. The appellant was dishonest about a range of matters, from innocuous things such as speaking French or Russian, to fabricating hallucinations and claiming to have committed brutal acts of violence. Furthermore, the sentencing judge found the appellant’s false claims of perpetuating greater amounts of violence reflected a deeply seated antisocial view that values and normalizes violence. 
 

 The sentencing judge concluded that, if released, the appellant was highly likely to resume gang affiliations. This finding was based on the appellant’s patterned history of returning to a gang lifestyle, along with skepticism expressed by Dr. Hashman and Ms. Nessman around the appellant’s ability to retract from his known community. 
 

 The sentencing judge accepted Ms. Nessman’s assessment finding the appellant to be at very high risk for general recidivism (based on static factors), at high risk for violently reoffending (based on static and dynamic factors), and meeting the criteria for antisocial and borderline personality disorders. Ms. Nessman was not confident that the appellant could be managed in the community. 
 

 Finally, the sentencing judge found the appellant’s history of breaching parole conditions and sustained substance abuse pose a high risk for the future and contribute to his intractability. 
 

 The threat analysis concluded with the sentencing judge finding the appellant was substantially indifferent to the reasonably foreseeable consequences to his victims in relation to the predicate offence and other pattern offences. These factors weighed towards a high risk of recidivism and pathological intractability. The sentencing judge declared the appellant to be a dangerous offender. 
 

The sentencing judge then moved to the sentencing analysis. He acknowledged that when sentencing the appellant, he must “impose the least intrusive sentence required to reduce Mr Runions’ public safety threat to an acceptable level” and “conduct an individualized assessment of all relevant circumstances and consider the sentencing objectives set out in ss. 753(4), (4.1) and 718-718.2, which include those developed for Indigenous offenders”: Runions at para 584. 
 

 The sentencing judge reviewed the Gladue considerations, found they reduced the appellant’s moral culpability and blameworthiness, and that “absent the balancing of other important sentencing factors would most certainly justify a reduction in what would otherwise be an appropriate sentence”: Runions at paras 601-603. However, he held Gladue factors did “little to change the obvious gravity of the grave circumstances of the predicate offence, and the fact ... Mr Runions violently injured and endangered the life of three people in approximately a one-month period”: Runions at para 606. The sentencing judge concluded that Gladue factors were not persuasive in helping establish “that Mr Runions’ risk to public safety can be controlled or managed in the community”: Runions at para 609. 
 

 After reiterating some evidence of the appellant’s high risk for violent recidivism, the sentencing judge held an indeterminate sentence is necessary as there is “no realistic possibility of eventual control of Mr. Runions in the community”: Runions at paras 610-611. 
 

 The appellant appeals his indeterminate sentence. 
III. Standard of Review
 

 A dangerous offender has the right to appeal their designation and sentence "on any ground of law or fact or mixed law and fact": s 759(1) of the Criminal Code. Questions of law are reviewed on a correctness standard, and questions of fact are reviewed on a reasonableness standard: Boutilier at para 81.
 

 The impact of an indeterminate sentence on an offender’s liberty requires appellate courts to apply a more robust standard of review for dangerous offender sentencing appeals: R v Natomagan, 2022 ABCA 48 at para 83. However, this standard is not equivalent to a trial de novo, and the findings of fact of sentencing judges must be afforded deference: Natomagan at para 83.
IV. Dangerous Offender Sentencing Analysis
Applicable Law
 

 Once an offender is declared to be a dangerous offender, s 753(4) sets out the mandatory sentencing options, which require that a dangerous offender “shall” receive one of the following sentences:
(a)
a sentence of indeterminate detention in a penitentiary;
(b)
the appropriate sentence for the underlying offence (minimum 2 years in a penitentiary) plus a long-term supervision order for a maximum of 10 years; or
(c)
a sentence applying standard sentencing principles for the offence for which the offender has been convicted.
 

 Section 753(4.1) mandates an indeterminate penitentiary sentence unless the court “is satisfied by the evidence adduced during the hearing of the application that there is a reasonable expectation that a lesser measure under paragraph (4)(b) or (c) will adequately protect the public against the commission by the offender of murder or a serious personal injury offence.”
 

 In Boutilier, the Supreme Court endorsed the framework outlined by Justice Tuck-Jackson in R v Crowe when sentencing under s 753(4.1) of the Criminal Code (at para 70):
First, if the court is satisfied that a conventional sentence, which may include a period of probation, if available in law, will adequately protect the public against the commission of murder or a serious personal injury offence, then that sentence must be imposed. If the court is not satisfied that this is the case, then it must proceed to a second assessment and determine whether it is satisfied that a conventional sentence of a minimum of 2 years of imprisonment, followed by a long-term supervision order for a period that does not exceed 10 years, will adequately protect the public against the commission by the offender of murder or a serious personal injury offence. If the answer is “yes”, then that sentence must be imposed. If the answer is “no”, then the court must proceed to the third step and impose a detention in a penitentiary for an indeterminate period of time. Section 753(4.1) reflects the fact that, just as nothing less than a sentence reducing the risk to an acceptable level is required for a dangerous offender, so too is nothing more required.
 

 The effect of ss 753(4) and (4.1) is that there is no presumption of an indeterminate sentence. Instead, a sentencing judge must “conduct a thorough inquiry into the possibility of control in the community and consider all of the evidence to determine the fittest sentence” and the least intrusive sentence required should be imposed: Zoe at para 32; Boutilier at paras 60-69. 
 

 By the time a dangerous offender has reached the sentencing or ‘penalty’ phase, there is ample evidence of prospective risk and intractability from the designation stage. The evidence relating to intractability will likely overlap between the first and second stages of analysis, but the issue before the court is fundamentally different. As stated in Boutilier at para 31:
The designation stage is concerned with assessing the future threat posed by an offender. The penalty stage is concerned with imposing the appropriate sentence to manage the established threat. Though evidence may establish that an offender is unable to surmount his or her violent conduct, the sentencing judge must, at the penalty stage, turn his or her mind to whether the risk arising from the offender’s behaviour can be adequately managed outside of an indeterminate sentence. 
 

 The penalty analysis focuses on what is necessary to adequately protect the public while bearing in mind that the least restrictive penalties should be exhausted prior to arriving at an indeterminate sentence: Boutilier at para 69. Given the overlap between evidence at the two stages of a dangerous offender sentencing, it is particularly important that the penalty analysis consider whether community management mechanisms and future treatment are— or are not— adequate to manage the risk. 
Application to the Sentencing Decision
 
 

 Upon reviewing the reasons of the sentencing judge, we have concluded that he did not conduct the necessary analysis at the penalty stage. As set out in Boutilier, the test at the penalty stage is distinct from the designation stage, and it requires a robust review of the evidence to assess the necessary sentence to manage the established threat. The analysis must focus on prospective treatment options and community control mechanisms to determine if a dangerous offender can first be controlled in the community in a manner that adequately protects the public from murder or a serious personal injury offence. 
 

 The sentencing judge recognized that s 753(4.1) does not impose an onus or rebuttable presumption for indeterminate detention and that the court “must impose the least intrusive sentence required to reduce Mr. Runions’ public safety threat to an acceptable level … (and) must conduct an individualized assessment of all relevant circumstances and consider the sentencing objectives set out in ss.753(4), (4.1) and 718-718.2, which include those developed for Indigenous offenders”: Runions at paras 583-584.
 

 However, the crux of the reasons for imposing an indeterminate sentence came down to reliance on the evidence of Dr Hashman, which had led to the finding of intractability at the designation stage and the conclusion that the appellant is a dangerous offender (at paras 610-11): 
…I accept Dr. Hashman’s opinion which recognizes that Mr. Runions’ adolescence and young adult life have been characterized by a persistence of substance abuse, a strong affiliation with gang membership, repeated and seriously assaultive behaviour, and poor compliance with release conditions. Mr. Runions has also demonstrated limited empathy for his victims, and Dr. Hashman opined that the duration and severity of his substance abuse disorder, his antisocial personality disorder, and his disingenuous presentation with significant symptom exaggeration was such that Mr. Runions’ prognosis is considered to be a high risk for violent recidivism. Mr. Runions was also identified with having cognitive deficits (although it was not suggested that these were at a level where Mr. Runions could not still learn).
I agree with Dr. Hashman’s conclusions, and as I have considered each of Boutilier’s stages of analysis, I conclude that there is no realistic possibility of eventual control of Mr. Runions in the community. All of the evidence, including the Gladue factors, do not provide me with any comfort that there is a reasonable expectation that Mr. Runions can be managed in the community. There is no less restrictive means by which the public can be protected.
The reasons do not adequately address evidence relevant to community control or explain why the appellant could not be managed in the community. 
 

 In upholding the constitutionality of s 753(4.1), Boutilier directed, at para 68: 
Under s. 753(4.1), the sentencing judge is under the obligation to conduct a “thorough inquiry” into the possibility of control in the community: Johnson, at para. 50. The judge considers all the evidence presented during the hearing in order to determine the fittest sentence for the offender:
The judge should . . . take into account all the evidence available before making a determination, which will inevitably require a thorough investigation. Once such an investigation has been conducted, it will be up to the judge to determine the sentence; there is no obligation on any of the parties to prove on any standard the adequate sentence one way or another.
(Neuberger, at p. 4-4.1; see also p. 10-10.)
 

 A new inquiry and a robust assessment of the relevant evidence is required at the penalty stage. Reliance on the rationale behind the finding of intractability at the designation stage does not satisfy the requirement for a thorough inquiry into the possibility of control in the community contemplated in Boutilier and risks a presumptive indeterminate sentence for dangerous offenders. A distinct analysis at the penalty stage will include consideration of the relevant evidence and firstly the possibility of control in the community, and exhaust determinate sentencing options before arriving at an indeterminate sentence. 
We cannot accept the Crown’s submission that - when read as a whole - the sentencing judge’s reasons demonstrate no error. As Boutilier directs, prospective evidence of treatability plays a different role at the penalty stage than at the designation stage (para 45):
The same prospective evidence of treatability plays a different role at the different stages of the judge’s decision-making process. At the designation stage, treatability informs the decision on the threat posed by an offender, whereas at the penalty stage, it helps determine the appropriate sentence to manage this threat. Thus, offenders will not be designated as dangerous if their treatment prospects are so compelling that the sentencing judge cannot conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that they present a high likelihood of harmful recidivism or that their violent pattern is intractable: see Neuberger, at p. 7-1, by M. Henschel. However, even where the treatment prospects are not compelling enough to affect the judge’s conclusion on dangerousness, they will still be relevant in choosing the sentence required to adequately protect the public.
The Crown’s position risks collapsing the inquiry required at the penalty stage into the inquiry at the designation stage. 
 

 We acknowledge that the sentencing judge addressed the prospective evidence of treatability in the designation stage of the analysis, but that is not sufficient. For example, at paragraphs 545 to 552 the sentencing judge reviewed the evidence on treatability from Dr. Hashman and referenced Mr. Beasley’s evidence about the minimum level of contact under a long-term supervision order. (“In this regard, even the intensive supervision afforded to offenders under a long-term supervision order is not 24-hour supervision 7 day per week; but, instead, intensive supervision amounts to meeting with a parole officer twice per week, or eight times per month.”). The purpose of reviewing this evidence at this stage was to inform the sentencing judge’s determination of the threat posed by the appellant and whether the evidence of prospective treatment changed the likelihood of future risk.
 

 Later, at paragraphs 610-611 the sentencing judge re-stated that he accepted Dr. Hashman’s opinion and conclusions that the likelihood of managing the appellant’s risk with treatment remains poor. While the sentencing judge’s decision to accept Dr. Hashman’s opinion is afforded deference, the sentencing judge’s inquiry at the penalty stage cannot end there, nor can the inquiry merely adopt the earlier conclusion about the threat posed by the appellant. The sentencing judge was required to explain why the less severe sanctions would not adequately protect the public. He failed to provide any reasons justifying the indeterminate sentence in place of the less severe measures and failed to grapple with the evidence regarding the scope of treatment options available to the appellant.
 

 Evidence relating to how an offender may be monitored and controlled in the community is particularly salient at the penalty stage. For instance, in this case, the analysis did not address the evidence of Mr. Beasley, a community supervision parole officer with Correction Services Canada, to the following effect:

Dangerous offenders are assigned to an experienced parole officer, and there is a great deal of scrutiny of both the offender and the work of the parole officer assigned to monitor the dangerous offender.
Strict conditions around substance abuse can be imposed, including treatment while in custody, followed up through the Community Residential Facility (“CRF”) half-way houses and other residential treatment programming. Ongoing treatment may be coupled with an order not to use drugs or associate with certain individuals and more frequent urinalysis. 
Dangerous offenders can receive specialized programing for violence while incarcerated and if paroled, they can receive maintenance components for the treatment received, including further referrals and access to a psychologist.
Special conditions can be put in place to prohibit association with persons involved in the criminal subculture, including specific gangs. There are special monitoring procedures for prohibiting gang association, including regular collateral contact with friends and family and “very good communications with the police – including the Calgary Police ‘guns and gangs’ unit.”
Mental health management in the community includes a holistic approach involving supportive CRF residency conditions and ensuring the offender has their basic needs met, such as food and shelter. 
Someone newly released on a long-term supervision order would need to meet with him for the first three months on an “intensive” basis which would mean two contacts per week or eight contacts per month. Contact may exceed this amount, and there would also be contact with collaterals.
Dangerous offenders are subject to supervision once released for the rest of their lives. 
If there is a violation, the parole supervisor must determine if the risk remains manageable. A parolee is continuously monitored, and there is “no hesitation whatsoever in returning someone to custody” if the risk is not manageable.

 

 The evidence of Mr Beasley speaks to community management mechanisms in place for the appellant’s offender profile and appears to be relevant to some of the concerns said to underpin the need for an indeterminate sentence, such as persistent substance abuse, gang affiliation, repeated violence, and poor compliance with release conditions. There was also evidence that the appellant had taken steps to remove himself from gangs while incarcerated, that he was reclassified from maximum to medium security, and that he has not yet received any treatment for substance abuse. Assessment of this evidence would also form part of a thorough inquiry into future rehabilitation. 
 

 The decision at the penalty stage failed to thoroughly conduct the correct inquiry, which requires a conceptually distinct analysis from that conducted at the designation stage, and did not fully consider all the relevant evidence. These are errors of law that warrant appellate intervention.
Gladue factors in Dangerous Offender Sentencing
 
 

 Courts should be mindful when applying Gladue considerations at the second stage of a dangerous offender sentencing for Indigenous offenders. In particular, an important consideration at this stage is “the types of sentencing procedures and sanctions which may be appropriate in the circumstances for the offender because of his or her particular Aboriginal heritage or connection”: Gladue at para 66; R v Ipeelee, 2012 SCC 13 at para 59. 
 

 While public safety is the enhanced objective for dangerous offender sentencing (Boutilier at para 56), when an offender’s liberty is at stake to the extent that it is in dangerous offender proceedings, it is particularly important to undertake a robust analysis of the evidence. We recognize that public safety is paramount and Gladue factors may play a more limited role at the dangerous offender designation stage. However, Gladue considerations are highly relevant at the penalty stage when considering how culturally sensitive programming might enhance future rehabilitation and community control options: Zoe at paras 57-58. As this Court stated in Natomagan at para 123: 
[Gladue] recognized that a single judgment about sentencing will not correct the disadvantages experienced by many Indigenous people, including systemic bias in criminal justice. Nonetheless, since “sentencing judges are among those decision-makers who have the power to influence the treatment of aboriginal offenders in the justice system”, it was necessary to address “the limited role that sentencing judges will play in remedying injustice against aboriginal peoples in Canada.” As the crisis of over-incarceration worsens, it is necessary to address the roles played and tools used by all decision-makers who influence the deprivation of liberty of Indigenous offenders through any means, including sentencing, placement and parole.
 

 Here, the sentencing judge noted the various treatment options available to the appellant that emphasize Indigenous healing through traditional and cultural means (paras 544 and 578-579). At the designation stage, the sentencing judge concluded that these treatment options did not alter the appellant’s high risk of recidivism and intractability. At the penalty stage, the sentencing judge found that Gladue factors did not reduce the appellant’s overall blameworthiness or gravity of the predicate offence (para 606). But the sentencing judge failed to turn his mind to whether Gladue considerations could have a positive effect and improve the prospects of successfully managing the risk: Zoe at para 58 citing R v Moise, 2015 SKCA 39 at para 24.
V.
 Conclusion
 

 The appeal is allowed. The matter is remitted back to the sentencing judge pursuant to s 759(3)(ii) of the Criminal Code to reconsider the sentence to be imposed on the appellant. The dangerous offender designation remains undisturbed. Given the passage of time, the parties may file updated information regarding the appellant in accordance with directions issued by the sentencing judge. 
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/ca/2023abca20.html
 



The appellant appeals his sentence for several offences committed in the context of trafficking a stolen vehicle, possession of firearms, and possession of methamphetamine and fentanyl for the purpose of trafficking. The appellant argues that the sentence imposed is unfit and is “crushing”. 
 



In particular, the appellant takes issue with the sentencing judge’s imposition of six months incarceration for Count 2, carrying a restricted firearm in a careless manner contrary to s 86(1) of the Criminal Code, RSC 1985, c C-46, and the sentencing judge’s decision that this sentence be served consecutive to the other firearms offences, despite both Crown and Defence submissions that it be served concurrently. The appellant also submits that the sentencing judge erred in imposing consecutive sentences for Count 4, the s 95(1)(a) offence, and Counts 6 and 7, the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, SC 1996, c 19 [CDSA] possession for the purpose of trafficking offences. 
 



An appellate court cannot interfere with a sentencing decision unless the sentence is demonstrably unfit or there is an error in principle that had an impact on the sentence imposed: R v Friesen, 2020 SCC 9 at paras 25-26; R v Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64 at paras 41 and 44.
 



The decision as to when it is appropriate to impose consecutive sentences is a discretionary one treated with the same deference afforded to the length of sentences ordered: R v McDonnell, 1997 CanLII 389 (SCC), 1 SCR 948 at para 46, 196 AR 321; see also R v Roberts, 2020 ABCA 434 at para 31.
 



With respect to Count 2, there is a broad range of possible sentences for this offence, ranging from a conditional discharge, fine or probation, to one- or two-years incarceration. While the offence concerned a handgun found in the backpack that was being worn by the third-party in a Walmart, the judge found that the firearm belonged to the appellant. The sentencing judge considered the taking of the firearm into a public place in deciding to impose the 6-month sentence. The sentencing judge further considered that the carrying of the firearm in a careless manner was “not part of the drug trafficking” and must be served consecutive to the sentences for the other offences: Sentencing Reasons at para 77. We see no basis to interfere with the sentence imposed for Count 2.
 



With respect to Count 4, the sentencing judge acknowledged that possession of a weapon should not be considered an aggravating factor for the CDSA possession for the purpose of trafficking offences and at the same time receive a separate consecutive sentence as that would be a form of double-counting: Sentencing Reasons at para 83. The sentencing judge then held that the “Alberta approach” is that sentences for weapons and trafficking offences should run consecutively, but if the global sentence is excessive, it may be reduced through the application of the totality principle: Sentencing Reasons at para 85 citing R v Dyck, 2020 ABCA 412, R v Bedi, 2015 ABCA 361; and R v Swales, 2016 BCCA 502.
 



While there is no single “Alberta approach” requiring the use of consecutive sentences for weapons and drug trafficking offences, the sentencing judge nevertheless followed an approach available to him. The ultimate question is whether the approach chosen in any given case leads to a proportionate sentence: Roberts at para 31. Here, the sentencing judge exercised his discretion to impose consecutive sentences for the weapons and possession for the purposes of trafficking offences, then turned his mind to overall fitness of the sentence when he applied the totality principle and ultimately arrived at a sentence of 12 and a half years incarceration for all offences. We are not satisfied that the sentence imposed is demonstrably unfit, or that the sentencing judge committed an error in principle that had an impact on sentence.
 



Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/ca/2023abca10.html
 



The appellant appeals his convictions by a jury of 1 count each of sexual interference, invitation to sexual touching, and sexual assault in relation to the complainant, who was between 12 and 13 years of age at the time the incidents occurred. The sexual assault count was stayed pursuant to R v Kienapple, 1974 CanLII 14 (SCC), 1 SCR 729. 
 



The complainant had attended an all-boys school near Genesee, Alberta in 1993-94, at 12-13 years of age. Corporal punishment was an important part of the school’s “philosophy”. The appellant was a teacher and “duty master” responsible for supervising the boys and inflicting corporal punishment on them. The complainant alleged that the appellant engaged in several sexual acts, mainly in the office where the corporal punishment was meted out, with two acts occurring outdoors.
 



 The Crown’s theory of the case was that the complainant was an outcast who was bullied at the school by the other students, and because of this, was targeted by the appellant. The Crown further alleged that by virtue of his role at the school, the appellant had opportunities to sexually touch the complainant while he was administering corporal punishment in the duty master’s room. 
 



The appellant testified, denying the allegations.
 



The appellant submits that there were several errors of law that occurred during his trial, which led to convictions that are a miscarriage of justice. He submits that the trial judge erred in not disclosing the complainant’s therapeutic records, in allowing improper cross-examination of the appellant, and in giving jury instructions which led to convictions that could not be otherwise supported by the evidence at trial.
 



We are not persuaded the alleged errors undermined the verdict. The appeal is dismissed.

 II.



Facts
 



The parties agree for the most part regarding the underlying facts, which were summarized in the appellant’s factum at paragraphs 3-11. To the extent that additional facts bear on the various grounds of appeal, those have been further highlighted below.
 



The complainant was one of about 10 to 20 grade 7 students living at the school during the 1993 – 1994 school year. The school encouraged a consistent routine with its students, who were expected to assist with chores outside of class time. The curriculum focused on academic excellence and encouraged outdoor activities, such as canoeing, snowshoeing, and running. The school also employed a strict disciplinary regime, which included running outdoors, performing additional chores, and being swatted, for violations of the student code of conduct. “Swatting” was the term the school used for “spanking”. All parents and students were made aware of the corporal punishment policy before the students attended the school and signed a contract agreeing to that effect.
 



The school had a “duty master,” who was a male teacher or staff member in charge of supervising the students overnight in the dorms. The duty master would be a different staff member each night, and this staff member would be expected to sleep in the assigned duty master’s room at night, which was the same room where all swatting punishments were administered by staff. During the day, there would be two “duty masters” scheduled to fulfill this role.
 

 The complainant testified to approximately 10 to 12 incidents of sexual activity with the appellant during the 1993 – 1994 school year and emphasized that these incidents were always in the duty master’s room, with only two exceptions. The complainant testified that the incidents of sexual touching occurred after being spanked by the appellant in the duty master’s room. The discipline would often occur during dinner or “less likely” during work period. There was one incident, which the complainant indicated was towards the end of the school year, where the appellant and the complainant engaged in mutual masturbation in the woods by the school. The complainant also testified to one instance of oral sex, which was the last incident of sexual contact, occurring near the end of year by the woods near the river.
 

 The complainant filed a police report regarding these incidents in February 2017 and was interviewed once, on February 23, 2017. In the interview, the complainant noted that around the year 2000, the complainant started disclosing the incidents “publicly” to their therapist at the time. The complainant later provided information to the police about receiving cognitive behavioral therapy at a clinic in 2017 and electroconvulsive therapy through another clinic in 2016. The complainant also disclosed that the incidents had been discussed with a therapist between 1997 and 1999.
 

 In 2019, the complainant also wrote an article that was published in an online magazine, discussing the experience of receiving funding through a victims’ services fund that the complainant had applied for in June 2017. In this article, the complainant wrote that the complainant was referred to the victim’s fund through trauma therapy group facilitators, who suggested that the complainant apply. The complainant’s initial application was denied, and as the article recounts, the complainant then asked a family doctor to write a letter about the effects of the complainant’s experience at the school. The complainant noted that this subsequent letter was “strong enough” to win the victim service’s fund appeal.
 

 The defence sought production of the complainant’s injury funding application to the Victims of Crime Compensation Board and the summary of the police investigation that formed part of the injury application. The trial judge concluded those records were “relevant” and ordered production under s 278.7 of the Criminal Code. 
 

 Th defence also sought production of the complainant’s therapeutic records under ss 278.3 and 278.5. Access to those records was denied. The trial judge concluded the statutory conditions for ordering production were not present, stating:
The -- I stress that the file itself, other than the two documents that I've said I will release to the accused, really all relate to why it took [the complainant] as long as it did … to make this application. There is nothing in any of the materials that, in my view, it would be in interests of justice to release to the accused. Quite the opposite. My -- one of my main concerns is that there is -- the release of this information would be based on a discriminatory belief; that is, that a complainant with mental health issues lacks credibility, is unreliable, and is less likely to have been a victim of a sexual offence.
I'm also concerned, as I was on the other application -- and I mentioned it in my decision -- that I want to protect society's interest in encouraging the reporting of sexual offences and obtaining of treatment and that I am concerned about when you're dealing with a complainant that has any kind of mental health issues, they -- that these are some of the more vulnerable people in our society. I am concerned that releasing these documents is offensive to the concept of protecting society's interest in encouraging the reporting of sexual offences and obtaining treatment. I find that there will be a little risk to the integrity of the trial process if I, (a), release these two records to the accused and, (b), do not release the balance of the records. (emphasis added)
 III.



Grounds of Appeal
 

 The appellant advances three grounds of appeal:
1)

The trial judge erred in law by denying disclosure of the complainant’s therapeutic records for the Court’s review under section 278.5(1) of the Criminal Code, RSC 1985, c C-46.
2)

The trial judge erred in law by allowing the appellant to be cross examined in an unfair manner that reversed the burden of proof, contrary to this Court’s direction in R v Kusk, 1999 ABCA 49, 232 AR 270.
3)

The trial judge erred in her instructions regarding the overlap between the three counts, and how the jury must approach its verdict as between counts.
 IV.



Analysis
Ground 1: The trial judge erred in law by denying disclosure of the complainant’s therapeutic records for the Court’s review under section 278.5(1) of the Criminal Code.
 

 The appellant argues the trial judge erred by denying his application to produce the therapeutic records because “the trial judge failed to undertake any individualized consideration of each requested record and imposed a higher standard than required to assess ‘likely relevance’ and ‘interest of justice’ at the stage one hearing”. The appellant does not argue that the “mere fact of receiving therapy nor the nature and extent of that therapy is relevant”, but effectively proposes that as long as an argument can be made that there might be something relevant in the interaction between the complainant and any therapist, the trial judge must conduct a preliminary examination of all such available records and assess “likely relevance” and “interest of justice” at the stage one hearing, contrary to what is outlined in section 278.5(1) CCC and in R v Mills, 1999 CanLII 637 (SCC), 3 SCR 668.
 

Specifically, the appellant argues “that:

(i) any statements made by the complainant about the allegations during therapy were made with a much fresher memory than their police statement or trial testimony; and 
(ii) the timing of the therapy in relation to disclosure to police raises serious questions about the influence of the former on the latter”: [AF para 19]. The appellant refers to complainant’s testimony that the complainant “discussed the incidents with a therapist as early as 1997, four years after they allegedly occurred. They again discussed the incidents with a therapist in 2000, seven years after the fact. The first time they disclosed the incidents in a manner not protected by the Criminal Code regime was in their police interview in 2017, 23 years after the alleged incidents”: [AF para 20]. The argument then concludes that those circumstances “should have raised some uncertainty as to whether production of the records to the judge was necessary”.
 

 Similarly, the appellant also suggests that an evidential basis exists for judicial exploration because the complainant:
also received interventions such as cognitive behavioral and electroconvulsive therapies only months before providing their statement to police. At the very least, these records should have been produced so the trial judge could have determined whether they contained any information necessary for the Appellant to make full answer and defence. [AF para 24]
 

 On its face, all of the foregoing comes down to an argument that a trial judge should have conducted an investigation of any records that might conceivably report some aspects of conversations involving the complainant and one or more therapists over perhaps 20 years in order to see if there is something useful to the defence. This is a reversion to reasoning rejected by Parliament and by the common law before that.
 

 Proper interpretation and application of the relevant provisions of the Criminal Code requires the Court to be mindful of Parliament’s purposes which are common to s 276 and to the set of provisions being s 278.1 to s. 278.91 of the Criminal Code. Those shared purposes include (a) the protection of the integrity of a trial by excluding irrelevant and misleading evidence and by preventing distortive and distracting satellite litigation inside trials, (b) the protection of the accused's right to a fair trial, and (c) the protection of the security and privacy of complainants. These purposes are noted in cases related to s 278: see eg R v Darrach, 2000 SCC 46 at paras 19-31, 2 SCR 443; R v Barton, 2019 SCC 33 at para 74, 2 SCR 579; see also R v Goldfinch, 2019 SCC 38 at paras 28-38, 3 SCR 3; R v RV, 2019 SCC 41 at paras 32-46, 3 SCR 237. They are also noted in cases related to ss 278.1 to s 279.91: see eg R v Mills, 1999 CanLII 637 (SCC), 3 SCR 668 and R v JJ, 2022 SCC 28 at paras 57-60, paras 113-122, paras 127-133, 471 DLR (4th) 577.
 

 Proper interpretation and application of these provisions also requires the Court to be mindful of the foundational evidence rule of relevance, of the long-standing restrictions of the collateral evidence rule, and of the basic principles of disclosure of third party records as described in World Bank Group v Wallace, 2016 SCC 15 at para 113, 1 SCR 207 which underscores that – even in cases which do not have the protective features of the relevant Code provisions here – before a judge is required to assess third party records, the applicant “must demonstrate” that the records sought are “likely relevant”: see also R v Pascal, 2020 ONCA 287 at paras 30-31, 387 CCC (3rd) 236, leave denied SCCA No. 214 (QL) (SCC No. 39243).
 

 To be relevant, the claimant must demonstrate “a reasonable possibility that the information is logically probative to an issue at trial”: R v McNeil, 2009 SCC 3 at para 17, 1 SCR 66. A claimant for disclosure of third-party records must meet this hurdle in any case whether or not the relevant Code provisions here are applicable. Then, as also pointed out in McNeil at para 21, Parliament has established a further (constitutionally valid) process for balancing whether to force disclosure of “records containing personal information of complainants and witnesses in proceedings for sexual offences under ss. 278.1 to 278.91 of the Criminal Code”. It follows that, at the very least, a claimant for disclosure of records that might contain reports or notations of conversations must do more than assert the bare possibility of statements existing within any conversations about the events under consideration being contained in records of this kind to call upon the trial judge to conduct a standardless sweep of such records on behalf of the defence.
 

 An accused person is entitled to a fair trial, not to the most forensically advantageous trial imaginable. Put another way, as in R v Rose, 1998 CanLII 768 (SCC), 3 SCR 262 at para 99:
. . . the right to make full answer and defence does not imply an entitlement to those rules and procedures most likely to result in a finding of innocence. Rather, the right entitles the accused to rules and procedures which are fair in the manner in which they enable the accused to defend against and answer the Crown’s case. [Emphasis added]
 

 Parliament has recognized that the criminal justice system was quite able to inflict additional damage on victims of sex crimes and to operate in a manner which deterred them from disclosing what happened to them. Further, even as respected a source as the eminent scholar John Wigmore had the following attributed to him as reported in the 1970 version of Evidence in Trials at Common Law, Vol 3A (Chadbourn rev 1970) at para 736:
Modern psychiatrists have amply studied the behaviour of errant young girls and women before coming before the courts in all sorts of cases. Their psychic complexes are multifarious, distorted partly by their inherent defects, partly by diseased derangements or abnormal instincts, partly by bad social environment, partly by temporary physiological or emotional conditions. One form taken by these complexes is that of contriving false charges of sexual offenses by men.
 

 To properly situate what Wigmore said, he wrote the above passage in 1939, but that attitude had not been improved by Chadbourn by 1970. Wigmore grounded his analysis on what was characterized as a “realist movement” which removed the “veil or romance which enveloped all womanhood” and was reflected in a large mass of cases and articles arguing that “[n]o judge should ever let a sex offence charge go to the jury unless the female complainant’s social history and mental makeup have been examined and testified to by a qualified physician.”: see p 737, para 924a of Evidence in Trials at Common Law, Vol 3A. 
 

 This is now facially recognizable as an astonishingly wrong-headed opinion: see A. Wakeling Corroboration in Canadian Law, (Toronto: The Carswell Company Limited, 1977) at p 116 (“Wigmore’s views of the character of women seem incredible in the twentieth century. … The presumption that charges are fabricated must be eradicated”). It is noteworthy that the requirement in what was then s 142 of the Criminal Code for juries to be instructed to look for corroboration of the testimony of women who complained of rape because it was “not safe to find the accused guilty in the absence of such corroboration” was not repealed until the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1975, S.C. 1974-75-76, c. 93 which came into effect in March of 1976. And, even then, corroboration continued to be a requirement for a variety of sexual offences. Moreover, the law of criminal evidence until 1983 still assumed that a truthful victim of rape would make a ‘recent complaint’ of the event – hence contributing to debate about the concept of ‘recent complaint’ into the 1980s: see eg R v Timm, 1981 CanLII 207 (SCC), 2 SCR 315.
 

 The upshot of all this was that what Wigmore was reporting was a seeming consensus, not a personal view. Both victims and the administration of justice suffered gravely from this sort of thinking. It has also been noted that in those years there was also a further phenomenon of the doubt of trauma and pain experienced by all adolescent or child victims of sexual abuse of whatever gender in a society which, in the past, tended to disbelieve or disregard their plight even if they did disclose the abuse: see the contextual discussion by L’Heureux-Dube J for the majority in R v L(DO), 1993 CanLII 46 (SCC), 4 SCR 419, SCJ No 72 (QL) at paras 27-36 (QL) concerning how the legal system had long re-victimized and placed barriers and disincentives in the path, particularly, of children in relation to disclosure of their abuse.
 

 Seen in light of the foregoing, the appellant’s position is out of step with the purposes and content of the Code provisions. It does not even fit modern concepts related to Crown disclosure more generally. The appellant suggests that the first stage of s 278.1 to s 278.91 of the Criminal Code requires judicial detective work. He argues that what the complainant might have said to any therapist or contact about the circumstances of the alleged offence at that time is “likely relevant to the reliability of the testimony, not the fact that therapy was sought or obtained”. 
 

 This is an ipse dixit, not evidence, let alone compelling evidence. The appellant denies that his motion amounted to a fishing expedition or “a case of stereotypical speculation”. His position is that the trial judge was required to preview any available specific documents and determine if there is anything there that is “likely relevant” to the credibility or reliability of the complainant’s report. The argument seems to go on to contend that the production “is necessary in the interests of justice”. It would not, on that theory, matter if there happened to be thousands of pages of records for the judge to ferret through.
 

 Put another way, the appellant suggests that the trial judge should conduct a preliminary investigation of the possibility that the complainant may have said different things to different people at different times under different circumstances about different aspects of what happened to the complainant. A court should appreciate that whether there seem to be ‘differences’ in what is reported in the records (let alone what was actually said at the time before the records were made) would not be the same as ‘inconsistencies’ and that whether there are ‘inconsistencies’ would not be the same as ‘contradictions’ or, as in the appellant’s alternative submission, ‘planted’ notions or memories.
 

 We should be realistic. What any person might happen to say about such an intensely private experience would be entirely dependent upon who the person is speaking to and to the context in which they are speaking. The precision of the record, where the complainant did not subsequently authenticate the record after it was made, would necessitate further assessment of the attentiveness, the accuracy or the completeness of the recorder. 
 

 As Clement JA for this Court pointed out in R v Cherpak (1978), 1978 ALTASCAD 171 (CanLII), 42 CCC (2d) 166, leave denied (1978) 42 CCC (2d) 166 (SCC), about whether a police report is a statement of a complainant: “it is plain from the record that the report of itself is not a statement made by the complainant and reduced to writing. It was composed by the officer from notes he had made, which prima facie do not purport to be a full and fair record of any statement given by the complainant. Nor does it appear that the report necessarily followed the text of the notes.” The decision in Cherpak itself has in key respects been swept into history but this observation about whether notes of others amount to statements of persons mentioned in them remains intact: see eg R v Moore, 2003 ABCA 163 at para 13, 17 Alta LR (4th) 29 applying Cherpak to medical records.
 

 Ultimately, the putative logic of a syllogism that “if the complainant did not mention event XX to therapist A, then XX did not happen” or of a syllogism that “if the complainant describes event XX with some particulars, then other particulars did not happen” both depend upon an unstated premise; namely, that if the complainant mentioned event XX or described event XX the complainant should be expected to have included sufficient particularity and precision to conform with more recent testimony. Either way the syllogism would ‘work’, the unstated premise is heavily loaded with stereotypical thinking in sexual assault cases. 
 

 More broadly, a researching trial judge would be in no position to presume such a premise to be made out for any specific alleged utterance or gist. Any ability to interpret the events of the communications between the persons involved would require considerable evidential exploration and elaboration. The trial judge should not be expected to conduct numerous in camera collateral minitrials during a preliminary review of therapeutic records searching for inconsistencies to be then assessed through such multiple levels of scrutiny.
 

 In the end, an accused seeking production of a complainant’s therapeutic records must do more than assert that records exist. An order for production requires “case-specific evidence or information to show that the record in issue is likely relevant to an issue at trial or the competence of a witness to testify and that the production be “in the interests of justice”: Mills at para 120. 
 

 Moreover, the “mere fact that a complainant’s reporting ... is not a verbatim recitation or is revealed in a piecemeal fashion is not in and of itself the conduit to infer negatively on a complainant’s credibility”: R v Garford, 2021 ABCA 338 at paras 20-22, 33 Alta. LR (7th) 1. As this Court said in Garford, 
Disclosure may well be a progressive exercise. The pain or trauma inherent in most decisions to disclose can be painful for victims. It is therefore not surprising that it may take some complainants more than one occasion to shed this burden and reveal the full picture.
Therapeutic intervention is likely to involve precisely that phenomenon.
 

 In R v Waterman, 2021 SCC 5, at para 2, 453 DLR (4th) 583 reversing 2020 NLCA 18 (CanLII), 2020 NCLA 18, 453 DLR (4th) 586, Moldaver J noted that the “complainant explained that counselling had helped improve his memory since his initial police statement. In the majority's view, it was for the jury to decide whether this explanation neutralized any reasonable doubt caused by the inconsistencies.” Moldaver J added that the Supreme Court declined “to second guess this determination”.
 

 The appellant forcefully argues that balancing the complainant’s privacy interests in therapeutic records should be performed only at the second stage, where only the trial judge will examine the records to determine if they meet the statutory requirements for production to an accused.
 

 In our view, the trial judge correctly included the complainant’s privacy interests in the first stage of assessing “likely relevance”. The Supreme Court of Canada in R v McNeil 2009 SCC 3 at paras 30-32, described the “likely relevance” threshold applicable as different from the “likely relevance” threshold applicable to third-party records generally defined in R v O’Connor, 1995 CanLII 51 (SCC), 4 SCR 411.
 

 The balancing exercise mandated by the Code is a qualitative one, and to an extent a normative one, and is not a matter of formalism or box-checking. Courts have long insisted on substance over form and that the law resists the idea of talismanic incantations that are dispositive in the law: R v Laberge, 2022 ABCA 385 at para 52, AJ No 1425 (QL), referring to R v W(D), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), 1 SCR 742.
 

 The decision to refuse to order the production of a therapeutic record pursuant to s 278.5(1) of the Criminal Code is a question of law: s 278.91, Criminal Code. Nonetheless, there is an element of deference as to the factual context and exercise of discretion. The trial judge correctly identified and applied the law when she refused production of the therapeutic records for the court’s inspection.
 

 The request for the therapeutic records was based simply on the hope that the complainant during therapy might have said something that might assist the defence relating to credibility or reliability of present evidence. Allowing disclosure without some reasonable basis would defeat the statutory process established in s 278.5.
 

 This ground of appeal must be dismissed.
Ground 2: The trial judge erred in law by allowing the appellant to be cross examined in an unfair manner that reversed the burden of proof, contrary to this Court’s direction in R v Kusk.
 

 This ground suggests that questioning of the appellant about his own version[s] of his interactions with the complainant or the visibility into the room where most of the alleged assaults occurred or both involved the concept in Kusk. It should be noted that the appellant at various points in his testimony conceded limits to his memory and that his answers to Crown counsel’s questions were based on “what I would have likely done” and “I'm certain based upon my character as how I would have conducted myself” and to one question “an assumption based on my previous recollections and practice”. The appellant also asserted that he had no independent memory of being alone in the duty master room “but I have independent memory of never being alone and doing anything sexually untoward with him”.
 

 The essence of Kusk is that “[i]t is improper to suggest that an accused must explain why a witness would make a complaint”. It is a principle that has been affirmed by this Court on several occasions: see eg R v Hilton, 2016 ABCA 397 at para 62, 343 CCC (3d) 304 at para 62; R v MJB, 2012 ABCA 119 at paras 51-52, 285 CCC (3d) 463. But M(JB) at para 32 explained that the fairness concern relates to the fact that “the Crown is not entitled to cross-examine an accused on the veracity of Crown witnesses or invite comment from the accused about a (the) witness's possible motive to lie”. This concern about fairness and burden shifting dates to R v Markadonis, 1935 CanLII 44 (SCC), SCR 657 and even further back to R v Baldwin, 18 Cr App R 175 (CA). Kusk was also a situation where Crown counsel followed up the impugned questions with an impassioned argument that there was no motive for the complainant to lie in her evidence and for her to go through the agonies of the court process.
 

 The case at bar is not a Kusk situation with respect to the cross-examination of the appellant or with respect to Crown counsel’s jury address. In the parts suggested by the appellant to be improper, Crown counsel merely, and not at any particular length, homed in on what the appellant remembered or did not remember. There was nothing illegitimate about the questions, and the appellant was quite able to offer answers tinged with confidence.
 

 The appellant argues that the Crown focused on the appellant’s memory and urged the jury to conclude that the appellant’s lack of specific memory and inability to provide an explanation meant that the appellant had not established his innocence. The appellant argues that in doing this, the Crown prosecutor subtly but effectively shifted the burden of proof. 
 

 It should be noted that the charge to the jury repeatedly reinforced the entitlement of the appellant to an acquittal if the Crown failed to prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Whatever might be said of Crown counsel’s submissions to the jury, as hereinafter discussed, the law assumes that the jury understands and complies with instructions on the law from the trial judge: see eg R v Griffin, 2009 SCC 28 at para 72, 2 SCR 42 (“juries must be trusted to have the requisite intelligence to perform their duties in accordance with the instructions given to them by the trial judge”); R v Barton, 2019 SCC 33 at para 177 (“Juries although expected to apply common sense, are above all expected to follow the instructions given by the trial judge.”); R v Khill, 2021 SCC 37 at para 116, 409 CCC (3d) 141, citing R v Corbett, 1988 CanLII 80 (SCC), 1 SCR 670 at pp 692-693:
The jury is, of course, bound to follow the law as it is explained by the trial judge. Jury directions are often long and difficult, but the experience of trial judges is that juries do perform their duty according to the law. We should regard with grave suspicion arguments which assert that depriving the jury of all relevant information is preferable to giving them everything, with a careful explanation as to any limitations on the use to which they may put that information. . . .
It is of course, entirely possible to construct an argument disputing the theory of trial by jury. . . . But until the paradigm is altered by Parliament, the Court should not be heard to call into question the capacity of juries to do the job assigned to them. [Emphasis added]
 

 A fortiori is that assumption about juror respect for the law and their instructions about it even more valid where the specific instructions are described by the trial judge as fundamental to their task and to their duty – as are the instructions as to recognizing and applying the burden of proof – when that point is repeatedly made clear to the jury. 
 

 This ground of appeal argues that Crown counsel’s questioning and submissions set the jury irrecoverably off course. That is not always the case even when the Crown conduct is improper. The Court in R v Hayles-Wilson, 2022 ONCA 790 at p 38, OJ No 5035 (QL) found it relevant that the jury was directed properly on burden of proof, even though the same Court felt the trial judge ought to have given a corrective instruction about Crown comments that the appellant tailored his evidence to Crown disclosure and that he had a motive to lie. The Court in Hayles-Wilson affirmed the accused’s conviction for first degree murder.
 

 The appellant selects one comment in the Crown’s closing submission: 
Paul Sheppard had no memory of [the complainant] ever being in the duty master’s room. I’d suggest a convenient answer. No memory then of sexually assaulting [the complainant] either. Doesn’t mean it didn’t happen, members of the jury.
 

 The cumulative effect he argues, then, is that the burden of proof shifted and created a significant risk that the jury would find the appellant guilty despite the existence of a reasonable doubt. We are not persuaded by this hypothesis. To begin, Crown Counsel clearly deferred to the jury, saying at the start:
I have a very brief summary of my theory of the case, and it is as follows. And this is based on my interpretation of the evidence, and once again you are the triers of fact.
The address of Crown counsel referred on occasion to aspects of the answers given by the appellant as to which Crown counsel’s submissions invited the jury to conclude that specific answers by the appellant should be considered untruthful:
I would suggest Paul Sheppard’s evidence was vague, at times illogical, stretched the truth to try and fit within the narrative that they're trying to give to you. Wet hair, could see around the blinds, who would come in through that door, the email compliment even though the lines are clear that it was not a compliment. I would suggest that you cannot rely on that testimony.
 

 It is not obvious what of this was inflammatory or excessive to the point of denying the appellant a fair trial. It was argument. After Crown counsel’s address concluded, there was a recess until 2:30 pm. After the recess, both counsel returned, and defence counsel expressed no concern about Crown counsel’s questioning or submissions, and instead went through elements of the charge to the jury as drafted [AT 658-667]. 
 

 As also noted in reference to ground three below, failure to raise an objection to a jury charge to seek any ‘correction’ is a factor in determining whether the concern raised on appeal had significance at the trial. Here, failure to object and press for correction is important because the ability of the trial judge to take any necessary and sufficient remedial measures is distinctly impaired: compare R v Rose, 1998 CanLII 768 (SCC), 3 SCR 262 at paras 124-137. Trial judges are not expected to be clairvoyant about what is largely a matter of argument by opposing counsel that the other counsel might consider to be objectionable. 
 

 If defence counsel was of the view that something as crucial as burden and standard of proof had been reversed by what Crown counsel did, one might have expected counsel to make a point of it: see eg R v Harvey, (1996) 1996 CanLII 3088 (BC CA), 109 CCC (3d) 108 at para (which involved an improper smear of defence counsel but the Court found no miscarriage of justice); R v Atkinson (1994), 149 AR 199 at para 29; R v Mack, 2012 ABCA 42 at paras 57-59, 522 AR 262, appeal dismissed 2014 SCC 58, 3 SCR 3; R v Clyke, 2021 ONCA 810 at paras 32-37, and paras 43-44 (“While each case falls to be decided on its own facts, a non-exhaustive list of factors to be considered includes:
 
(i) the seriousness of the improper comments;
(ii) the context in which the comments were made;
(iii) the presence or absence of objection by defence counsel; and
(iv) any remedial steps taken by the trial judge following the address or in the final instructions to the jury ...” (emphasis added)). In Clyke, the litany of Crown counsel misconduct was blatantly improper and unfair and counsel “protested vigorously”. The trial judge’s attempt in Clyke to fix the situation fell short.
 

 Improper cross-examination by Crown counsel can take various broad forms, two of which were described in R v McKnight, 2022 ABCA 251 at para 121, 416 CCC (3d) 248 (under motion on SCC No 40375) referencing in R v Ahmed, 2015 ONCA 751 at paras 41-42 as follows:
The first category involves the way the Crown treats the accused during a cross-examination. The Crown cannot harass the accused, engage in sarcasm, seek to demean the accused, or punish the accused for invoking his or her constitutional rights: see R. v. R. (A.J.) (1994), 1994 CanLII 3447 (ON CA), 20 O.R. (3d) 405 (C.A.), at 412-13.
The second category of potentially improper cross-examination of an accused can be approached as an admissibility of evidence issue. It involves questions that have the potential to elicit answers that are improperly prejudicial to the accused.
 

 Other objectionable conduct arises where Crown effectively testifies or personally vouchsafes the validity of certain evidence, or when Crown counsel mis-states the law in a manner which trespasses on the trial judge’s role, or when Crown counsel directly impugns the conduct of defence counsel. None of those forms of abusive conduct exists here. 
 

 The appellant was not asked to explain why the complainant would lie and the Crown neither invited the jury to consider why the complainant would lie, nor suggested that it had proven that the complainant had no motive to lie. Rather, the record reflects simply that the appellant was put through a firm cross-examination whereby his inconsistencies in his memory of the events were examined. Crown counsel’s cross-examination did not cross the line from aggressive to abusive, prejudice the appellant in his defence, nor did he act so improperly as to ‘bring the administration of justice into disrepute”.
 

 Moreover, improper cross-examination or submissions by the Crown do not always require a new trial. To start with, the zone including conduct which is merely inappropriate or is seriously wrong or is so prejudicial that it deprives the accused of a fair trial is blurry and trial judges are in the atmosphere to respond if the line in that zone is crossed.
 

 The question is whether, first, the Crown conduct was improper, and second, whether any improprieties found resulted in a miscarriage of justice such that the curative proviso in s 686(1)(b)(iii) of the Criminal Code is inapplicable: McKnight at para 119, Fanjoy v The Queen, 1985 CanLII 53 (SCC), 2 SCR 233 at 240; R v Ruptash, 1982 ABCA 165 at para 16, 68 CCC (2d) 182; R v R (AJ) (1994), 1994 CanLII 3447 (ON CA), 94 CCC (3d) 168 at 176; R v AG, 2015 ONCA 159 at para 22, 319 CCC (3d) 441; R v Belcourt, 2019 BCCA 435 at para 48, 60 CR (7th) 151. Improper closing submissions are in the same legal position as cross-examination by the Crown: R v T(A), 2015 ONCA 65 at paras 29-31, 124 OR (3d) 161; R v Hong, 2019 ONCA 170 at para 33, OJ No 1148 (QL); R v Chacon-Perez, 2022 ONCA 3 at paras 129-146, 410 CCC (3d) 1.
 

 This ground of appeal cannot succeed and is rejected. 
Ground 3: The trial judge erred in her instructions regarding the overlap between the three counts, and how the jury must approach its verdict as between counts.
 

 Finally, the appellant takes issue with the following portion of the jury instructions:
There is overlap between counts 1 [sexual interference], 2 [invitation to sexual touching], and 3 [sexual assault]. Therefore, if you find the accused, Paul Sheppard, not guilty on counts 1 and 2, you cannot find him guilty on count 3. If you find the accused, Paul Sheppard, guilty on count 1 or count 2, you must find him guilty on count 3 as well.
(emphasis added, Trial Transcript, 690/25-28.)
 

 The appellant argues that the actus reus of the offence in count two (invitation to sexual touching) is satisfied by a communication and does not require actual touching. Whereas sexual assault requires proof that the appellant physically touched the complainant in sexual circumstances. As such, the appellant argues that it was an error to direct the jury to convict the appellant of count 3 (sexual assault) if it found the appellant guilty of count 2 (invitation to sexual touching only). The appellant says the jury charge may have confused the jury.
 

 The trial judge did not expressly say that the jury’s determination of guilt on counts 1 and 2 must be independent of one another but the jury charge itself separated each crime definition and made it clear what the differences in elements were [AT 683/33-690/23]. It was at the end of these very careful explanations and distinctions between the counts, their elements and the relevant evidence that the trial judge then made the challenged comments about “overlap”.
 

 Misdirection in a jury charge is an error of law: R v Barton, 2019 SCC 33, at para 54, 2 SCR 579. That said, a jury charge is generally reviewed on a standard of reasonableness for adequacy and fairness, not perfection: R v Jacquard, 1997 CanLII 374 (SCC), 1 SCR 314, para 2; R v Morningchild, 2011 ABCA 215, para 3, 275 CCC (3d) 565; R v Araya, 2015 SCC 11 at para 39, 1 SCR 581; R v Goforth, 2022 SCC 25 at paras 20-21, 415 CCC (3d) 1.
 

 A jury charge is to educate, not complicate the case, and "common sense and the law need not be strangers": R v Rodgerson, 2015 SCC 38, para 54, 2 SCR 760. In that regard, a reviewing court must take a functional approach to the assessment of a jury charge, asking whether the charge was sufficient to enable the jurors to decide the case according to the law and the evidence taken as a whole: Araya, 2015 SCC 11 at para 39. As stated in R v Cabrera, 2019 ABCA 184, paras 17-19, 442 DLR (4th) 368, affirmed 2019 SCC 56, 4 SCR 136: the review of jury instructions:
. . . requires properly, not perfectly, instructed juries. Thus, a jury charge is not subjected to minute scrutiny or held to a standard of perfection. As Martland J noted in R v Young: “There will probably never be a perfect charge or one that cloistered appellate counsel cannot find objectionable after minute scrutiny.”
Instead, in accordance with the functional and contextual approach, alleged errors must be examined in the context of the entire charge and trial as a whole. That includes addresses by counsel, how the parties treated issues at trial and counsel’s submissions as to the charges. A jury charge is not inadequate because more could have been said or what was said could have been better phrased. Allegations of non-direction are to be assessed contextually in light of the facts and circumstances of each particular case.
[Citations omitted.]
 

 As noted above, the trial judge told the jury that if it acquitted on counts 1 and 3, it must acquit on count 2. Saying so, arguably, might be unduly favorable to the defence in a different context with different evidence. The trial judge then went on to tell the jury that if the jury returned a verdict of guilty on either count 1 or 2, a guilty verdict on count 3 would follow. Defence counsel did not object to this. Rather defence counsel said about this passage: “You might add the sentence, This is for you to decide. But that should be obvious.”
 

 We agree with the Crown’s submission that, if there was error here, the 686(1)(b)(iii) of the Code curative proviso should apply. As exemplified in R v Samaniego, 2022 SCC 9, at paras 66-67, 412 CCC (3d) 7, the application of s 686(1)(b)(iii) of the Code can be topic by topic and it applies when there is harmless error on any topic: see also R v V(R), 2019 SCC 41 at para 85, 3 SCR 237; R v Khan, 2001 SCC 86 at para 28, 3 SCR 823; R v Settle, 2021 ABCA 221 at paras 48-76, 407 CCC (3d) 154 (single JA, cases cited); compare R v White, 2022 SCC 7 at paras 8-10, 411 CCC (3d) 419.
 

 The appellant argues that what the jury was told “led them to believe that a finding that he committed any one of the three offences was sufficient to ground liability for the other two”. Here, a guilty finding on count 1 for sexual interference was inevitably consistent with a guilty finding on count 3 for sexual assault. The pivotal issue was the inclusion of the words “or count 2” in the next sentence. This rendered the comment somewhat indistinct. But we are satisfied that, in the context of the whole charge, the jury would have understood that count 2 depended on a finding of invitation with intention and unlike the other two counts it did not turn on itself.
 

 The practical overlap in the counts is that the Crown’s case was that the appellant was guilty of all three counts, and the defence case was that the appellant was guilty of none of them. As for that practical overlap in the counts, the Crown submits:
31

 It is true that, in a different case, it is theoretically possible that a jury might reach different verdicts on charges of invitation to sexual touching and sexual assault. But, in the context of this evidence and the way the case was argued (all or nothing), that theoretical possibility is so abstract as to be meaningless. This jury was instructed as counsel approved, in a way that was consistent with the way the case was argued. The jury was not misled.
We agree with the Crown that for some trials the evidence respecting counts is so ‘collective’ in the assessment sense that efforts in a charge to disaggregate the counts can be a mere exercise of academic abstraction.
 

 Finally, as to s 686(1)(b)(iii) of the Code, it is relevant to note again that the appellant’s counsel approved the draft charge. Counsel’s approval at trial, while not conclusive, does speak to the defence perception of fairness of the instruction and also to whether there was a substantial wrong or miscarriage of justice: R v McCrimmon, 2022 ABCA 289 at paras 5-12, 417 CCC (3d) 390; R v C(JL), 2020 ABCA 356 at paras 40-41, AJ No 1219 (QL); see also R v Calnen, 2019 SCC 6 at para 38, 1 SCR 301. 
 

 As said in McCrimmon at para 12 about the impact of counsel’s agreement with a draft charge on an issue, “more is required on appeal than simply stating that ‘the trial judge is ultimately responsible for the contents of the charge’”. Counsel discussed this specific part of the charge with the trial judge. The defence was that the appellant did not commit any crimes. The jury returned verdicts of guilty on all three counts. Technical distinctions between the elements of the counts does not make the jury wrong in doing so. It is understandable why the trial defence counsel would not want the jury to lose sight of the essential position of the defence which is that none of what was alleged happened.

 V.



Conclusion
 

 The appeal is dismissed.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/ca/2023abca7.html
 



In September of 2011, the appellant was involved in a brief romantic relationship. He became possessive and controlling. He called the woman continuously as a means of monitoring her activities with others. One evening he found her at a bowling alley talking with another man. He threatened to harm the man and then himself with a machete. That scared the woman, who refused to see him again. He then left messages on her phone, threatening to stalk her. 
 



She reported the matter to the police who, upon locating the appellant, arrested him. Following the arrest, the appellant became agitated in the police car and, when removed from the car, repeatedly attempted to kick the police officer. At the police station he kicked another officer and later, upon being transferred to the Remand Centre, he threatened a police officer and the officer’s family and spit at him. The appellant was charged for his actions against the police. 
 



Prior to trial he was sent for a psychiatric assessment. The examining psychiatrist concluded the appellant may have a defence under section 16 of the Criminal Code, namely that he suffered from a mental disorder that rendered him incapable of appreciating the nature and quality of his acts or knowing they were wrong.
 



That diagnosis appears to have been accepted by the trial judge without analysis, and by the appellant without objection. 
 



Significantly, upon transfer to the Alberta Hospital pursuant to a warrant of committal, the appellant was placed in the care of another forensic psychiatrist, Dr. Brown. Upon completing his assessment, Dr. Brown concluded the appellant was not, and had not been, suffering a mental disorder or disease of the mind as contemplated by section 16 of the Criminal Code, rather, that he had a border-line personality disorder, an anti-social personality as well as a cannabis use disorder. That diagnosis was consistent with the appellant’s behaviour. This leads us to question whether the appellant qualified at first instance for a not criminally responsible (“NCR”) verdict and should not have been sent to the Alberta Hospital.
 



Still, for the past 10 years, the appellant has been kept at the Alberta Hospital where efforts were made to treat him for his impulsive, threatening behaviour, with only limited success. During this time, he has threatened staff, damaged a television by punching it in anger, violated numerous hospital rules, and, while on a pass, threatened another casual romantic partner and her family when she wanted to break up with him. For the latter offence, he was charged criminally and sentenced to time served to be followed by two years probation. Notably, a section 16 defence was not advanced in response to these charges.
 



In addition, the appellant escaped from the hospital and was at large for nine months in British Columbia until he was apprehended.
 



As required, the appellant’s status has been reviewed by the Review Board on an annual basis. The Review Board’s ruling following the last review is the subject of this appeal. The appellant has asked for an absolute discharge or, alternatively, that he be allowed to live with his parents in Camrose, Alberta, while subject only to a conditional discharge. The Crown, supported by Dr. Brown’s assessment, opposed both proposals, arguing that an absolute discharge was premature as the appellant would not voluntarily participate in further treatment without which he was a significant risk to re-offend in behaviour that would cause, not physical, but psychological harm. For this reason, the Crown asked the appellant remain subject to full warrant. 
 



Ultimately, the Review Board decided a full warrant was necessary and appropriate. However, the Review Board directed the hospital staff to explore the possibility of transitioning the appellant to Camrose where he could live with his parents, while subject to a conditional warrant. 
 

 Notably, after the appeal was filed but before it could be heard, the appellant was allowed to live in Camrose with his parents while still subject to a full warrant. We understand that to be the situation to date.
 

 Still, the appellant appeals the Review Board’s disposition order alleging that the Review Board’s finding that he was a significant threat to the safety of the public was unreasonable, unsupported by the evidence, and that the Review Board erred by failing to account for the mandatory factors in section 672.54 of the Criminal Code.
 

 We agree to the following extent. The Review Board referred to Dr. Brown’s assessment that there was a low risk the appellant would cause serious physical harm. The Review Board further noted that the appellant posed a greater risk of causing psychological harm to the public as opposed to physical harm. In view of these observations, it would have been appropriate for the Review Board to offer some indication of the type of psychological harm of concern to them; that is, was it of the same threatening nature against women as that evidenced in 2011, and again in 2019. It also would have been appropriate for the Review Board to offer some indication of the degree or extent of risk of the appellant causing psychological harm, and whether such risk has been reduced by the treatment the appellant has received over the past decade at the Alberta Hospital. 
 

 We note the appellant is soon to have his next annual review. Mindful of the Supreme Court’s observation in R v Owen, 2003 SCC 33 (CanLII), 1 SCR 779, that the potential harm must be serious such that neither a small risk of grave harm, nor a high risk of trivial harm, is sufficient, we ask the Review Board to specifically address the issue in Owen, and to indicate the nature and extent of psychological harm the appellant is at risk of inflicting if discharged absolutely.
 

 There is however another, more pressing concern. As noted in our introductory comments, it appears that after the initial assessment, the appellant’s treating psychiatrist, Dr. Brown, determined that while the appellant has personality disorders, he does not suffer from a mental disorder or disease of the mind; a condition precedent to an NCR finding that would exempt him from criminal liability.
 

 Accordingly, we ask the Review Board to expressly address that issue and indicate whether the appellant ever qualified to be exempt from criminal liability on account of mental disorder as contemplated by section 16 of the Criminal Code, and whether he currently suffers a disease of the mind as contemplated in that provision. If, as we expect, the answer is no, then we ask the Review Board to address why the appellant should not be absolutely discharged. 
 

 Lastly, we heard that the appellant may be pursuing an appeal of the original finding of NCR, and would obviously need an order granting an extension of time to appeal. If that path is followed, in the interests of judicial economy, such an application can be brought to any member of this panel
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/kb/2023abkb39.html
 



SGH is charged with two counts of sexual interference (Section 151 of the Criminal Code, RSC 1985, c C-46) and two counts of sexual assault (Section 271 of the Code).
 



There is a single Complainant (AB). There are three alleged incidents. The first two incidents occurred when AB was 8 to 10 years old and the third incident, which led to these charges, occurred in July 2020 when AB was 12 years old. AB is presently 14 years old.
 



SGH denies the allegations.
 



With agreement of counsel, I summarized this Decision in open court; this filed written Decision was provided to counsel immediately thereafter. 
II.




 Facts
A.
 Background 
 



The Accused, SGH, is married to PH. At all relevant times, SGH and PH lived in Edmonton, in a detached residential home. The three incidents are alleged to have occurred in that residence. 
 



AB (the Complainant) is PH’s granddaughter and SGH’s step-granddaughter.
 



The material family relationships can be summarized as follows: 
(a)




CG is AB’s biological mother. 
(b)




BB is AB’s biological father. 
(c)




JB is the son of BB and CG and AB’s brother. He was 16 in July 2020, when the allegations were made.
(d)




BB is married to SP. SP is AB’s stepmother. BB and SP had a child together who was a few weeks old in July 2020. 
(e)




SP is PH’s biological daughter and SGH’s stepdaughter.
 



AB, JB and this youngest child resided with BB and SP in the Drayton Valley area. 
 



CG was living in Edson in July 2020. JB and AB saw CG every second weekend. The exchange of the children between the parents would occur in Entwistle, west of Edmonton.
 

 On a regular basis, approximately 10 times a month, BB and SP dropped off AB, and sometimes JB, at SGH and PH’s residence. This happened in conjunction with BB and SP visiting Edmonton to attend appointments and do their shopping.
B.
 The Incidents
 

 AB was the only Crown witness at trial. She also gave a statement to Detective Steve Hunt at the Zebra Centre (the Zebra interview) on July 23, 2020. That video recording was in evidence and was admitted under s 715.1 of the Code. 
 

 AB described three separate incidents. AB said during the Zebra interview that each of the incidents involved SGH touching her left breast with his hand and, on the third occasion, with his hand and mouth. 


















 i.



First Incident
 

 AB was not sure exactly when the first incident occurred but postulated that it happened in approximately 2016-2018 when she was eight to ten years old. 
 

 AB was reading a book with SGH on the couch in the living room, which is located on the first floor of the house. PH and SP (AB’s stepmother) were in the kitchen, three to five steps away. AB remembered that the book had a red cover and was about a prince saving a princess. 
 

 AB’s evidence is that SGH reached over her shoulder and put his hand down her shirt, touching one of her breasts, squeezing and caressing it for about 5 minutes. When SGH heard PH coming, he removed his hand. AB testified that she was too young to understand what happened or know whether it was wrong. 


















ii.



Second Incident 
 

 In 2018 or 2019, when AB was about 10 years old, she and SGH were in SGH’s home office, which is located in the basement of SGH and PH’s residence. 
 

 PH, BB (AB’s father) and SP were upstairs. AB was sitting in a wheeled office chair showing SGH a music video on his computer. SGH was standing behind the chair. AB testified that SGH put his hand down her shirt and touched the bare skin of her breast area for the duration of the music video. 
 

 During the Zebra interview and examination-in-chief, AB said that she asked SGH to stop what he was doing; SGH complied. AB also said that SGH asked her if she liked it, and she said no, and he stopped. 

















 iii.



Third Incident
 

 On July 8, 2020, BB and SP were going to get baby pictures taken and dropped AB off at the house with SGH and PH. Before they left for their appointment, there was a discussion about a recent school award that AB had received. SGH and PH decided to give AB $300 toward her purchase of a Lego set that she wanted. AB began searching for the Lego set on her phone to show it to SGH and PH. SGH suggested that they look it up on his computer downstairs. 
 

 AB was looking at the Lego set on the computer. SGH went upstairs for about 10 minutes. When he came back downstairs, AB was colouring and the computer was in a screensaver mode, which is engaged after approximately 10 minutes of inactivity. 
 

 SGH and AB decided to watch a movie.
 

 In her Zebra interview, AB said that SGH was initially sitting on his black recliner chair and AB was sitting on the couch; however, AB could not see the movie from the couch. SGH offered to switch, and they did. SGH later moved to a white chair to see the movie better. 
 

 At some point during the movie, SGH told AB that he wanted to hold her. He came behind the recliner chair, reached over, and touched her breast over her shirt. Then, he put his hands under her shirt and bra. To avoid him, AB went to the washroom, hoping when she came back, he would not continue.
 

 When AB returned from the washroom, SGH got up from the white chair and continued touching AB’s breast under the shirt and bra from behind the recliner chair. Then, he came around the chair, got on his knees in front of AB, pulled her shirt down to expose her breast, and put his mouth on it. He asked her if anyone else had done this before and whether she liked it; she said no. SGH stopped. AB got up, went upstairs, got water, and came back downstairs to finish the movie. 
C.
 AB Discloses the Incidents 
 

 Two days after the third incident, on July 10, 2020, while SP was in a registry, AB was alone in the car with her brother, JB, waiting for her. JB had been commenting on the appearance of a female passerby, and this (according to AB) prompted AB to tell him about the third incident. JB accused her of lying. 
 

 Later that day, there was a parenting exchange between CG and BB. CG was driving AB and JB to her home. JB told CG about the conversation he had with AB. When AB and CG were alone, AB told CG about the third incident. CG said that AB had to tell BB and SP when she returned to their care. 
 

 After returning from the weekend with CG, AB did not tell BB and SP but, on July 14, 2020, BB, after having been contacted by CG, told AB that CG wanted to talk to him about something. This prompted AB to tell BB and SP about all three incidents. 
 

 SP reported the allegations to Drayton Valley RCMP the same day, and they referred her to the Edmonton Police Service. 
III.



 Law Related to Offences
 

 Sexual assault is an assault that is committed in circumstances of a sexual nature such that the sexual integrity of the victim is violated: R v Chase, 1987 CanLII 23 (SCC), 2 SCR 293 (Chase) at para 11; R v Ewanchuk, 1999 CanLII 711 (SCC), 1 SCR 330 (Ewanchuk) at para 24.
 

 The actus reus of sexual assault requires proof beyond a reasonable doubt that: the accused touched the complainant; the touching was sexual in nature; and the complainant did not consent to the touching (Ewanchuk at para 25). 
 

 The question of consent is not an issue in this case. AB was (and is) under 16 years of age. 
 

 To satisfy the mens rea requirement of sexual assault, the Crown must prove that SGH intended to sexually touch AB.
 

 In order to secure a conviction on the sexual interference charge, the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that AB was less than sixteen years old at the time of the alleged offence; SGH intentionally touched her, either directly or indirectly; and the touching was for sexual purpose (R v Sears, 1990 CanLII 11206 (MB CA) at para 3).
 

 The actus reus is a touching of a person under the age of 16. The two mens rea elements are the intention to touch and the sexual purpose of the touching.
IV.



 Burden and Standard of Proof
 

SGH is presumed to be innocent. The presumption of innocence is connected to the requirement for proof of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, a fundamental principle of our criminal justice system. 
 

 The Crown has the burden of proving each element of an offense. That burden of proof rests on the Crown throughout the trial. The benefit of any doubt must be extended to the accused: R v Lifchus, 2 SCR 320 (Lifchus) at para 36.
 

 Proof beyond a reasonable doubt is not proof to an absolute certainty, but it is proof to a high level of certainty. It is beyond proof of probable or likely guilt: R v Starr, 2000 SCC 40 at para 242; Lifchus at para 32. 
 

 Reasonable doubt can arise from the evidence or from the absence of evidence. It is grounded in reason and common sense, and determined without any basis in sympathy, prejudice, emotion, sentiment, leaps of logic, flights of imagination, or frivolous considerations: Lifchus at para 36.
 

 SGH gave evidence at trial. Therefore, I must consider the Supreme Court of Canada’s direction in R v W(D), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), 1 SCR 742 (W(D)) as interpreted by the Alberta Court of Appeal in R v Ryon, 2019 ABCA 36 (Ryon) and R v Achuil, 2019 ABCA 299, leave to appeal dismissed 2020 CanLII 71203 (SCC). 
 

 These principles were helpfully summarized by Renke J in R v Hermkens, 2021 ABQB 1016 at para 12, as follows:
(i) The burden of proof is on the Crown to establish the accused’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt and that burden remains on the Crown so that the accused person is never required to prove his innocence, or disprove any of the evidence led by the Crown ….
(ii) In that context, if the accused’s evidence denying complicity or guilt (or any other exculpatory evidence to that effect) is believed, or even if not believed still leaves the jury with a reasonable doubt that it may be true, then the jury is required to acquit ....
(iii) While the jury should attempt to resolve conflicting evidence bearing on the guilt or innocence of the accused, a trial is not a credibility contest requiring them to decide that one of the conflicting versions is true. If, after careful consideration of all the evidence, the jury is unable to decide whom to believe, they must acquit.
(iv) Even if the jury completely rejects the accused’s evidence (or ... other exculpatory evidence), they may not simply assume the Crown’s version of events must be true. Rather, they must carefully assess the evidence they do believe and decide whether that evidence persuades them beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused is guilty. Mere rejection of the accused’s evidence (or ... other exculpatory evidence) cannot be taken as proof of the accused’s guilt.
 

 Additionally, the Court in Ryon at para 47 held that whether evidence exculpating an accused raises a reasonable doubt must be assessed in the context of the evidence as a whole. 
 

 I will now turn to discuss the general principles of credibility assessment, myths and stereotypes and the particular considerations arising from the evidence of children. 
V.




 Credibility Assessment Generally
 

Witness credibility and reliability are the over-arching issues and challenges in this case. Credibility assessment is about witness’ honesty and truthfulness. Reliability is about the accuracy of the witness’ evidence. 
 

 A number of factors require careful consideration when assessing the credibility of a witness. The uniqueness of each witness and the facts of each case must be weighed and evaluated carefully. 
 

 As Cory J observed in R v S (RD), 1997 CanLII 324 (SCC), 3 SCR 484 (S (RD)) at para 128:
It is, of course, true that the assessment of the credibility of a witness is more of an “art than a science.” The task of assessing credibility can be particularly daunting where a judge must assess the credibility of two witnesses whose testimony is diametrically opposed. 
 

 In making credibility findings, the evidence must be considered in its entirety. Each part of the evidence is part of the whole, and those parts interact and inter-relate. Individual pieces of evidence cannot be viewed in isolation: White v The King, 1947 CanLII 1 (SCC), SCR 268 at 271; Ewanchuk at paras 29 – 30. 
 

 The factors that can be considered in assessing credibility include the witness’s character, emotions and feelings, self-interest, hostility, attitude towards the accused, motive to lie, character for truthfulness and prior deceptive behavior. Additionally, evidence of bias or dishonesty and material facts that are proven through the testimony of other witnesses can weigh into the analysis: R v Tash, 2013 ONCA 380 at paras 40 – 43. Inconsistencies in the particulars and the whole of the evidence are certainly an important consideration. No single factor or group of factors is necessarily determinative, and any list of factors cannot be viewed as exhaustive.
 

 Additionally, the trier of fact’s life experience and common sense can weigh into the process, which necessarily involves the trier of fact’s view of the evidence in all its diversity as it emerges during the trial, in tandem with their experience, logic, and intuition: R v Marquard, 1993 CanLII 37 (SCC), 4 SCR 223 at para 49; S(RD) at para 129. 
VI.



 Myths & Stereotypes
 

 Assessing credibility and reasonable doubt cannot rely on myths and stereotypes, including generalizations about how human beings behave in certain situations. This is impermissible. Such reasoning can undermine the fairness of the trial and distort the truth-finding process that is at the heart of the trial: R v ARD, 2017 ABCA 237 at paras 6 – 9 (ARD), aff’d sub nom R v AJRD, 2018 SCC 6. In short, myths, stereotypes, preconceptions and related irrelevant considerations must be strenuously avoided. Generalizations or other matters that are not in evidence play no part in the credibility assessment process: S(RD) at paras 129 – 130. 
 

 In R v JC, 2021 ONCA 131 (JC), the Ontario Court of Appeal explained that stereotypical thinking is not to be conflated with the application of logic or common sense. First, judges must avoid speculative reasoning that invokes common-sense assumptions or human experience that are not grounded in the evidence or appropriately supported by judicial notice (JC at para 58). Second, factual findings, including determinations of credibility, cannot be based on stereotypical inferences about human behaviour; it is an error of law to draw inferences about how a complainant or accused is expected to act based on stereotypical inferences (JC at para 63).
VII.


 Particular Considerations Arising From Child Witnesses
 

 In R v W (R), 1992 CanLII 56 (SCC), 2 SCR 122 at 132 -133 (W(R)), the Supreme Court of Canada stated the following regarding the evidence of children:
The law affecting the evidence of children has undergone two major changes in recent years. The first is removal of the notion, found at common law and codified in legislation, that the evidence of children was inherently unreliable and therefore to be treated with special caution…So if a court proceeds to discount a child’s evidence automatically, without regard to the circumstances of the particular case, it will have fallen into an error.
The second change in the attitude of the law toward the evidence of children in recent years is a new appreciation that it may be wrong to apply adult tests for credibility to the evidence of children. One finds emerging a new sensitivity to the peculiar perspectives of children. Since children may experience the world differently from adults, it is hardly surprising that details important to adults, like time and place, may be missing from their recollection. Wilson J. recognized this in R. v. B. (G.), 1990 CanLII 7308 (SCC), [1990] 2 S.C.R. 30, at pp. 54-55, when, in referring to submissions regarding the court of appeal judge’s treatment of the evidence of the complainant, she said that
... it seems to me that he was simply suggesting that the judiciary should take a common sense approach when dealing with the testimony of young children and not impose the same exacting standard on them as it does on adults. However, this is not to say that the courts should not carefully assess the credibility of child witnesses and I do not read his reasons as suggesting that the standard of proof must be lowered when dealing with children as the appellants submit. Rather, he was expressing concern that a flaw, such as a contradiction, in a child's testimony should not be given the same effect as a similar flaw in the testimony of an adult. I think his concern is well founded and his comments entirely appropriate. While children may not be able to recount precise details and communicate the when and where of an event with exactitude, this does not mean that they have misconceived what happened to them and who did it. In recent years we have adopted a much more benign attitude to children’s evidence, lessening the strict standards of oath taking and corroboration, and I believe that this is a desirable development. The credibility of every witness who testifies before the courts must, of course, be carefully assessed but the standard of the “reasonable adult” is not necessarily appropriate in assessing the credibility of young children. [emphasis added]
 

 When dealing with the evidence of children, courts should not treat flaws and contradictions in a child’s testimony as having the same effect as they do in an adult’s testimony. Children perceive - and therefore describe - events differently from adults. Courts must assess the flaws and inconsistencies in children’s evidence with this in mind. 
 

 The Supreme Court of Canada further expanded on the treatment of evidence of children in R v F (CC), 1997 CanLII 306 (SCC), 3 SCR 1183 (FCC), specifically the effect of subsequent contradictory evidence of a complainant after adoption of the initial video interview. At trial, the complainant, who was six during the offence and the video interview, adopted her video interview during her examination-in-chief. On a cross-examination, the complainant made statements which contradicted the video interview. For example, she testified differently about clothing of the offender and whether he was awake at the time of the offence. 
It will be self‑evident to every observant parent and to all who have worked closely with young people that children, even more than adults, will have a better recollection of events shortly after they occurred than they will some weeks, months or years later. The younger the child, the more pronounced will this be... It is a common experience that anyone, and particularly children, will have a better recollection of events closer to their occurrence than he or she will later on. (See, e.g., Rhona Flin and J. R. Spencer, “Do Children Forget Faster?”, [1991] Crim. L.R. 189, at p. 190.) It follows that the videotape which is made within a reasonable time after the alleged offence and which describes the act will almost inevitably reflect a more accurate recollection of events than will testimony given later at trial. (FCC at para 19).
 

 The Supreme Court of Canada warned courts at para 48: 
 A skilful cross‑examination is almost certain to confuse a child, even if she is telling the truth. That confusion can lead to inconsistencies in her testimony. Although the trier of fact must be wary of any evidence which has been contradicted, this is a matter which goes to the weight which should be attached to the videotape...
 

 The Court further held at para 49 that the trial judge’s analysis of inconsistencies was reasonable:
[The trial judge] applied the principles from B. (G.), supra, and W. (R.), supra, in holding that the minor inconsistencies regarding peripheral details were not of “great significance” and that they should not preclude her from relying on the videotaped statement as true. Furthermore, she found that the complainant’s evidence‑in‑chief and cross‑examination were consistent with the evidence she gave in her videotaped statement with respect to the essential elements of the assault.
 
VIII.

 Analysis
A.
 AB’s Testimony
 

 AB’s testimony was reasonably consistent. She demonstrated maturity, spoke clearly about her experience, did not engage in an inappropriate accusatory behavior, and answered questions without apparent exaggeration. 
 

 However, AB’s has problematic elements that must be considered carefully. 
(a)




During the Zebra interview and her examination-in-chief, AB stated that that the first people that she told about the third incident were JB and CG. While not formally in evidence, CG states in her interview with Detective Hunt that AB told her that three people were made aware of the allegation: AB’s best friend, her brother, JB, and her biological mother, CG. When confronted with this inconsistency at trial, AB said that she probably meant that JB was her best friend. When questioned further, AB said that it was her actual best friend who she told only about the first incident at around the time when it happened and not the other incidents. 
(b)




AB during her initial cross-examination said that she was not covered in a blanket during the third incident, but after she was questioned further, she said that it was possible that she had the blanket on her as she used it on many other occasions. 
(c)




During AB’s examination-in-chief with respect to the third incident she stated that she did not see PH while she was in the basement with SGH watching the movie; in fact, she did not see PH until BB and SP returned to the house after their errands. On cross-examination, AB testified that she did not remember whether PH came downstairs to offer lunch. Her story changed. She then said that PH came downstairs a number of times and said that she went upstairs with SGH to eat lunch. Then, she said they ate downstairs. 
(d)




In the Zebra interview, AB testified that she was wearing the same purple shirt at the interview as the one she wore during the second incident. At trial, AB changed her answer and said that, while she was wearing a t-shirt, it was not necessarily that purple one. It appears that AB understood that it was unlikely to be the same shirt given that she had grown during the intervening time period; therefore, she changed her answer.
 

 The Defence raised an issue with the fact that AB added more details in examination-in-chief and on cross-examination which were not mentioned in the Zebra interview. The Zebra interview was under an hour, and most of the time was spent making AB comfortable with the interview. Detective Hunt asked broad questions and did not take an opportunity to ask many detailed questions. Therefore, it is expected that when AB was asked detailed questions during her in-chief and cross-examination, new additional details surfaced. I do not take issue with this.
 

 Bearing in mind the directions in the jurisprudence regarding evidence of children and evidence of events that occurred when a witness was a child, it is conceivable that the inconsistencies arise from confusion, the passage of time, genuine mistake or perhaps other factors. The inconsistencies do not invariably ground a conclusion that AB was untruthful. 
B.
 SGH’s Testimony
 

 SGH gave exculpatory evidence. He denied any sexual contact with AB, at any time, in any way. 
 

 I found SGH’s exculpatory evidence to be forthright and consistent. He was not shaken or impeached during cross-examination. His display of emotions was appropriate and understandable, and appeared genuine. SGH refrained from lashing out, or behaving in an accusatory fashion; rather, he highlighted the catastrophic personal consequences that have accrued to him as a result of these charges. 
 

 SGH concurred with AB’s evidence that the two of them had a close relationship. He had known her since BB and SP began dating when AB was seven years old. He taught AB to read, they played games together on many occasions, watched movies and had nicknames for each other. AB spent a great deal of time in his home. 
 

 SGH made several statements in his testimony that might have invited him to downplay or embellish. For example, SGH acknowledged many occasions where he and AB were alone together. He was candid about not treating AB as a granddaughter in the same way he treated his other grandchildren. He explained this as arising from only having known AB from when she was 7 years old (rather than from birth), and that AB had other sets of grandparents. 
 

 SGH had a clear memory of the events of July 8, 2020. He explained his clear memory because it was the last time that he saw AB, BB, SP and the new baby. Further, his biological son was to be married in a few days in SGH’s yard. As well, the allegations against SGH became known that same week. In my view, it is reasonable that SGH would have reflected on and considered the events and have a reliable memory concerning them.
 

 SGH testified that on July 8, 2020 he was downstairs with AB initially searching Lego on his computer. They ended up watching a movie, and AB sat in the recliner after moving there from a couch. PH came downstairs several times to see if they needed anything. She brought sandwiches for lunch. While they were watching the second movie, BB and SP had returned and SGH went upstairs, AB following thereafter where she, according to SGH, sat next to him while he held the baby. 
 

 SGH candidly acknowledged that he made an unusual exception on July 8, 2020 in allowing AB to use his computer. He confirmed that he left the office for 10 minutes allowing AB to use his computer without his direct supervision. While AB had testified that she had used it on another occasion (the second incident) to watch a music video, SGH testified that July 8, 2020 was the first and only time that AB used his computer.
 

 This latter point is significant. SGH’s evidence is that he has highly sensitive information on his computer, related to his volunteer work as an advocate for individuals who are seeking benefits related to medical issues arising from their employment. On the surface, it would seem preposterous that SGH would leave a child of approximately 10 years of age alone with the computer. However, SGH explained that he knew he was only going to leave the room for a few minutes. He trusted AB given their close relationship, and she was occupied looking at the Lego set online when he left. While it was perhaps unnecessarily risky to leave AB alone, I accept SGH’s explanation. 
 

 The evidence is that SGH has chronic back and knee issues that make it difficult for him to get up from a seated or kneeling position. While these health problems slow SGH down, they do not make it impossible for him to sit or kneel but this evidence renders it somewhat unlikely that SGH would kneel while touching AB sexually, for some period of time, in a location that can be easily viewed from the top of the stairs: he could not easily change his position if someone else in the house came down the stairs. There are three steps to a landing, and then the stairs to the basement. From the top of the stairs to the basement and on descent the evidence is that a person could see the back and left side of the recliner. According to SGH, PH was up and down the stairs more than once, in fact a number of times; I accept this evidence. Simply put, it is unlikely that SGH would have been able to get up quickly enough from his knees in time to not be seen by PH if she was descending the stairs at the time of the assault. 
 

 Additionally, SGH has hearing problems for which he wears hearing aids. SGH testified that he did not wear his hearing aids at home on the day of the third incident; on the evidence at trial, he would not have heard someone coming down the stairs. 
 

 The Defence argues that the incidents were unlikely to happen because the risk of SGH being caught was extremely high, especially during the first incident: other family members were just a few steps away. In general, I reject this argument. Courts continuously see the brazenness or opportunism of offenders including in cases of sexual assaults of minors (see R v BW, 2017 CanLII 14508 (ON SC); R v H (TR), 2002 CanLII 44895 (ON CA)). For example, the offender in R v FC, 2018 ONSC 561 (CanLII) (FC) assaulted his stepdaughter in what court found to be a brazen manner (at para 6):
Once again, the facts surrounding the sexual assault on G.L. were brazen. The assault occurred in a home occupied by F.C. and his wife, L.C., who ran a daycare centre. F.C. enticed G.L. up to a bedroom on an upper floor of the home, where he spread peanut butter on her vagina and proceeded to lick it off. He then took a bath with her in the nude and cleaned the peanut butter off her vagina. G.L. was five years of age.
FC was convicted of two additional offences. All offences happened in close proximity to family members or members of the public (see FC at para 93).
 

 Brazenness by itself does not raise a reasonable doubt. 
 

 With respect to the second incident, I accept SGH’s evidence that AB was on his computer for the first time on July 8, 2020. That conclusion is grounded, in my view, in the totality of the evidence with respect to all three alleged incidents. 
 

 The evidence, when considered in context and as a whole - the proximity of others to the location of the alleged offences, the general layout of the house, SGH’s physical limitations including hearing issues - and viewed logically in light of SGH’s credible and reliable testimony, constitutes believable exculpatory evidence that raises a reasonable doubt with respect to all three alleged incidents.
C.
 Other Evidence
 

 The Defence theorized that AB told an initial lie to her brother, who then told her mother, forcing AB to begin a trail of lies that culminated in her trial evidence. The Defence noted the evidence that AB laughed when she told her brother. AB was motivated to add an additional two lies after the initial lie to give legitimacy to her story. 
 

 First, I decline to speculate on AB’s motives. As stated in JC, judges generally must avoid speculative reasoning when assessing evidence. See also R v Lunz, 2013 ABQB 150 at para 62. 
 

 Second, as held in JC, it would an error of law for me to draw inferences from the fact that AB laughed when telling her brother about the third incident. I cannot conclude that a typical child sexual assault victim would not have had the same reaction (ARD) or that this has any particular relevance or meaning to the issues in this trial. 
D.
 Selective and Delayed Disclosure
 

 The Defence suggested that AB’s selective disclosure demonstrates that her evidence is not credible. However, as established in R v DP, 2017 ONCA 263 (DP) relying on R v DD, 2000 SCC 43 (DD), 2 SCR 275, selective and delayed disclosure does not impact AB’s credibility. In DP at para 30, the Court emphasized that disclosure of sexual assaults can be very painful for victims; therefore, it is not surprising if there is piecemeal disclosure that happens over a period of time. The Court in DP also held that there is no fundamental difference between delayed disclosure and piecemeal disclosure of prior sexual abuse.
 

 I accept AB’s explanation for her delayed and selective disclosure – it is plausible. First, regarding AB’s initial disclosure to her brother, JB, AB told him about the most recent incident, which he did not believe. It makes sense that she did not feel comfortable disclosing other incidents to him. Second, regarding AB’s disclosure to her biological mother, AB explained that her relationship with CG has been strained for years, with trust issues. This is a plausible explanation for why AB did not feel comfortable disclosing all three incidents at once. AB disclosed all incidents to BB and SP, the two parental figures with whom she lives full time.
 

 I conclude that AB’s delayed and selective disclosure does not affect her credibility. 
E.
 Absence of Evidence
 

 Section 274 of the Code codifies the principle that corroboration is not required for certain offences:
274 If an accused is charged with an offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 170, 171, 172, 173, 271, 272, 273, 286.1, 286.2 or 286.3, no corroboration is required for a conviction and the judge shall not instruct the jury that it is unsafe to find the accused guilty in the absence of corroboration. [emphasis added]
 

 The Supreme Court of Canada in W(R) at 132 and R v AG, 2000 SCC 17 (CanLII) at para 30 confirmed that there is no requirement of corroboration for a child’s evidence. 
 

 During argument, the Defence urged consideration of the absence of forensic evidence. SP provided Detective Hunt with a t-shirt that AB wore on July 8, 2020 saying that it had not been washed. Detective Hunt told SP that the shirt would be sent for DNA testing, but the results of testing, if any, are not in evidence. 
 

 While an absence of evidence is a consideration in any reasonable doubt assessment, in this case, I refrain from engaging in speculation concerning the lack of DNA testing. 
 

 The Defence also argues that the absence of any evidence from PH, who was in the house during all three alleged incidents, is problematic. The police did not interview her, and she did not testify at trial. Again, I refrain from engaging in speculation regarding why the police did not interview PH. The Crown has a wide discretion and can choose which witnesses to call; there is no obligation to call a specific witness (R v Cook, 1997 CanLII 392 (SCC), 1 SCR 1113 at paras 36, 39). While there is case law allowing the Court to draw adverse inferences in certain situations where the Crown fails to call a key witness (R v Michel, 2007 NWTCA 3 (CanLII); R v Trakas, 2008 ONCA 410), I will not draw any conclusions or inferences of that sort here as it would lead me into speculation. 
IX.



 Conclusion
 

 I have carefully considered all evidence. 
 

 On the totality of the evidence, I accept the exculpatory evidence of SGH. It is believable in the context of the evidence as a whole. Thus, I have a reasonable doubt. 
 

 I find SGH not guilty of the charges against him. 
 

 SGH is acquitted of all charges in the Indictment. 
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/kb/2023abkb45.html
 



The Defendant, Terrence Homa, makes application for a stay of the proceedings against him due to delay, which infringes his right to be tried within a reasonable period of time as guaranteed by s 11(b) of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
 



The Information against Homa was sworn on September 10, 2018. This case was set for a trial by judge and jury in Peace River on September 13 to 15, 2022. However, upon the application of the Defendant, these trial dates were adjourned so that the Defendant could proceed with the delay application and the Crown would be permitted to respond. 
 



I was appointed the Case Management Justice by the Chief Justice pursuant to s 551.1 of the Criminal Code in order to hear the Defendant’s application under s 11(b) of the Charter.
 



Materials were submitted detailing the history of this case since September 10, 2018, consisting of Court records, transcripts of proceedings, and correspondence between counsel and the Court. Counsel made submissions to me on October 28, 2022. Crown counsel was permitted a further period of time to obtain evidence relating to any attempts to serve the Defendant after the Information was sworn, and the communications resulting in the setting of the trial dates for September 13 to 15, 2022. In this regard, I was provided with an affidavit of non-service of Constable Jessica Roy sworn on November 17, 2022, and the affidavit of Krista Massier, a legal assistant at the Prosecutor’s office in Peace River, Alberta, sworn on November 16, 2022. 
 



Defence counsel advised that he would not be making any further submissions following receipt of these affidavits from Crown counsel. 
 



The Crown respondent does not take issue with the thirty month presumptive ceiling established in R v Jordan, 2016 SCC 27 for cases proceeding through to trial at Superior Court. The Supreme Court in Jordan also stated that exceptional circumstances may be found which affect the overall calculation of delay. All justice system participants must be proactive in trying to mitigate delay. 
 



The Information sworn on September 10, 2018 provided that the informant had reasonable grounds to believe that the Defendant: on count 1, that on or between September 1, 2015 and June 30, 2016 at Peace River, Alberta, for a sexual purpose touched the claimant, a person under the age of sixteen years contrary to section 151 of the Criminal Code; and on count 2, provide that during the same period of time at Peace River, Alberta, the Defendant committed a sexual assault against the claimant contrary to section 271 of the Criminal Code.
 



The parties agree that, as for the relevant timeline, the clock started to run from the date the Information was sworn, September 10, 2018.
 



The affidavit of non-service of Constable Roy indicates a number of attempts to locate Homa in Alberta and British Columbia, including attempts to contact by telephone. However, there is no evidence that Homa had been served with notice of the proceedings being brought against him. In the absence of such evidence, there was nothing compelling Homa to come to Court. 
 

 The matter was before the Court on November 19, 2018. There was no service and the Court lost jurisdiction. On January 21, 2019, there was no service and jurisdiction was lost. 
 

 On February 28, 2019, there was no service and a warrant was issued in the public interest. 
 

 Ultimately, the warrant was served and counsel appeared on behalf of Homa in Court on October 7, 2019. 
 

 I find that the delay from September 10, 2018, to October 7, 2019, was not attributable to the Defence, as Homa had not been served with process and, accordingly, there was no requirement for him to appear in Court in response. 
 

 On November 18, 2019, a preliminary inquiry was set for April 15, 2020. This is not a Defence delay. 
 

 The Preliminary Inquiry did not proceed on April 15, 2020, however, because the Courts were shut down in late March 2020 due to the Covid pandemic. There was a ten week adjournment for all matters involving people not in custody, from March 16, 2020. It is agreed by counsel that the delay resulting from the Covid shutdown was an exceptional circumstance. This has been recognized in other cases, including R v Ghraizi, 2022 ABCA 96 at paras 5, 12, 13 and 14, and R v Clifford, 2022 ABQB 509 at paras 11 and 14. 
 

 No one was present for the Accused on June 29, 2020 and there was an adjournment to August 10, 2020. There was no explanation other than, perhaps, a backlog of cases at that time. 
 

 The Defence concedes that for the period April 15, 2020 to August 10, 2020 the Covid closing was an exceptional circumstance that the Court may take into account, under R v Jordan.
 

 On May 25, 2021, the Preliminary Inquiry was set for December 1, 2021. 
 

 The Crown had submitted that exceptional circumstances in this instance should be calculated from the last day of the Court closure plus another six months, being a reasonable period of time for the Crown and Court to organize this and all other cases that had been previously adjourned due to the Court closure. There was no specific authority cited for a six month allowance as urged by Crown counsel. However, during the submissions before me, it was conceded by the Defence that the period from April 15, 2020 to May 25, 2021 should be considered to be an exceptional delay and/or Defence delay, and therefore deducted from the thirty month presumptive delay established by the Supreme Court of Canada in Jordan. This concession by the Defence effectively includes the additional period of six months following the Covid Court closure that had been urged by the Crown.
 

 The Court had no available time for the Preliminary Inquiry up to November 23, 2021 so any delay to that date after May 25, 2021 was not attributable to the Defence. 
 

 The Defence was not available from November 23 to December 1, 2021. However, this six day period was reasonable in the circumstances and not attributable to the Defence. 
 

 On December 1, 2021, the Defence conceded the committal to the Court of Queen’s Bench. At that point, the Defence submits, and I find, that the delay was twenty-five months and fifteen days not attributable to the Defence, of the thirty-eight month delay total to that time. 
 

 The Queen’s Bench Appearance Court Arraignment was on January 10, 2022. Counsel had previously arranged on January 7, 2022 for a three day trial by Judge and Jury on September 13 to 15, 2022. 
 

 The Crown submits that the delay from January 10, 2022 to September 13, 2022 should be attributable to the Defence. However, in reviewing the correspondence between counsel and the Court Coordinator, I find that this period of delay is not attributable to the Defence, given the attempts that were made to settle upon the agreeable trial dates. Before January 10, 2022, the Crown indicated that its witness, Constable Roy, was unavailable for February 2022 and March 21 to 23, 2022. On January 6, 2022 at 12:05 p.m., Defence counsel’s office advised the Court and counsel that Mr. Corbett was available on the following dates until year end in 2022:
May 17 – 20 
May 25 – 27
May 30 – June 3
July 12 – 15
July 18 – 19, 21 – 22, 28 – 29
August 2 – 5
August 29 – September 2
September full availability
 

 The Court Coordinator responded on January 6, 2022 that the following dates were available with the Court for a three day Judge and Jury trial in 2022 at Peace River:
March 2 – 4
April 12 – 14 
May 2 – 4 
May 3 – 5 
June 28 – 30 
 

 The Court then noted that there were no summer trial courts in the regions.
 

 The next available trial dates in the Court Calendar after the summer recess were September 13 – 15, 2022. After canvassing dates, both Crown and Defence were available on September 13 – 15, 2022 for trial and a Pre-Trial Conference was to be held on March 18, 2022. These dates were confirmed by Defence counsel in a letter to the Court dated January 7, 2022. As the dates were pre-booked, the scheduling of the trial was removed from the QBAC list on January 10, 2022.
 

 Therefore, although Defence counsel was not available for proposed dates by the Court Coordinator before September 2022, by the same token, the Court could not accommodate the dates proposed by Defence counsel in May and June 2022, and the Court was not sitting during the dates proposed by Defence counsel during the summer months. There was no indication on the file as to the availability or otherwise of Crown counsel for the proposed trial dates, but the correspondence indicates that the Crown and Defence were agreed on scheduling the trial from September 13 to 15, 2022. I find that the Defence was not responsible for this period of delay, given the attempts by Crown and Defence and the Court Coordinator to arrive at the first available trial date available to both Crown and Defence and the Court schedule. The Defence was not trying to push the delay over thirty months. The Defence did not acquiesce nor did it cause the delay in that time period. 
 

 An application was made by the Defence for an adjournment of the trial to begin September 13, 2022 in order to bring a Charter s 11(b) delay application. The adjournment application was heard and granted by Justice Germain on September 2, 2022. The Defence concedes that the adjournment was at the request of the Defence and any delay after September 2, 2022 is the Defence’s delay. 
 

 The request for case management was made by counsel to the Chief Justice who then appointed me to hear this application as the Case Management Justice. 
Conclusion 
 

 In reviewing the entire history of this case since the Information was sworn on September 10, 2018, I find that the total delay from September 10, 2018 to September 2, 2022 is forty-eight months minus six days. Subtracting thirteen months, the period from April 15, 2020 to May 25, 2021 for the Covid delay and Defence’s conceded unavailability leaves a thirty-five month delay, beyond the presumptive thirty month limit established by the Supreme Court in Jordan.
 

 Accordingly, I conclude that this delay infringes the Defendant’s right to be tried within a reasonable period of time, as guaranteed by s 11(b) of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.
 

 I grant the requested stay. 
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/kb/2023abkb9.html
 



This decision is a more or less verbatim rendition of the reasons for decision delivered orally in Court on January 5, 2023. I have only added formatting and full citations.
 



These reasons should be read in conjunction with the trial decision at 2022 ABQB 370.
 



I’ll describe what I’m going to discuss today. First, I will address the family and friends of Ms. Vivancos, the victim. Then there is a longer technical section in which I discuss the principles of sentencing, aggravating and mitigating factors and legal cases, as they apply to this case. Near the end, before I formally pronounce sentence, I will speak to Mr. Jolicoeur directly. Finally, I will pronounce the sentence.
B.
 Why I reserved
 



The decision I am making today is in regard to Mr. Jolicoeur’s parole ineligibility, following his conviction for second-degree murder. I heard sentencing submissions on December 16, 2022. Some of you might be asking why I needed an additional three weeks just to pick a number between 10 and 25. Indeed, the range suggested to me by counsel was narrower, between 10 and 14.
 



I gave myself time to review all the legal cases submitted to me by counsel. I also wanted to think of how to express my reasons in a way that the family and friends of the victim, Saladina Vivancos, would feel that they have not been let down by the justice system. From hearing the victim impact statements, I am aware that members of Ms. Vivancos’ circle have a great interest and emotional investment in the outcome of this case. At the same time, I must accord Mr. Jolicoeur all of the rights and considerations to which he is entitled as a convicted person under our system of law.
C.
 The Victim and the Victim Impact Statements
 



Last time, I heard twenty-three separate victim impact statements. Some were read by the people who wrote them and the rest by Ms. Magill. There were other family members and friends who watched the sentencing hearing but did not submit statements. I have to be accountable for the decisions I make and I felt it was important that family members and friends of Ms. Vivancos have the opportunity to hear the decision directly from me.
 



Each one of the victim impact statements spoke of a needless and senseless tragedy, of a searing and painful loss that leaves an immense family and a network of friends on two continents bereft. One of the statement-givers, Isabel Belyk, said that Saladina Vivancos was so much more than what she was doing at the time of her death. I agree with that sentiment. During the trial, what I heard was that Saladina Vivancos scraped together a living as a drug dealer. But, as the victim impact statements made apparent, she was so much more than that.
 



During the victim impact statements, I heard that she was a loving and giving person, who found a world that was full of wonders and loved being alive, who looked forward to being a mother, and someone who was a devoted friend. Throughout the victim impact statements, the phrase I heard repeatedly (from her sister Andrea Labour, her friend Diana Pascaru, her friend Judith Adama and others), was that Saladina Vivancos was a “beautiful soul”.
 



Those who gave statements spoke of how their lives will never be the same, how hope has been compromised, optimism dampened, and doubt engendered. Several statement-givers spoke of how Saladina’s mother, Rosa, succumbed to cancer during the trial. They said that the loss of Saladina sapped her of the will to live. That is not a scientific explanation but I am prepared to accept, in effect, that is what happened.
 

 As Renke J said in R v Soosay, 2021 ABQB 507 at paras 51-52, these victim impact statements are an important reminder to the sentencing judge to consider the full impact of the offence and the full meaning of the human loss caused. The statements are also a message to the offender, here Mr. Jolicoeur, about what he did and the pain he has caused. I note that some of those who read their statements in Court took the opportunity to look Mr. Jolicoeur directly in the eye as they addressed the Court. The statements therefore speak to one of the objectives of sentencing, which I will discuss in a moment, “to promote a sense of responsibility in offenders, and acknowledgement of the harm done to victims…”
 

 However, the presence of the victim impact statements, or their number or content cannot be treated by the sentencing judge as an aggravating factor. As I said in paragraph 83, page 18 of my trial decision, “If there is one thing that our society and our community values, it is life, and the preservation of life, no matter who the victim is… We are all equal that way.” So also says the Court of Appeal in R v Deer, 2014 ABCA 88 quoting the British Columbia Court of Appeal in R v Eneas, BCJ 262 at para 53: 
The law ought not to measure the value of the life taken, for to do so would be to diminish every person’s essential right to live out his or her appointed span.
 

 Let me summarize this part of my reasons with this: I want the statement-givers to know that I have heard them, each and every one of them. I want them to know that the justice system acknowledges the very real human consequences of crime and the loss and suffering inflicted. Saladina Vivancos is not just another crime statistic; she is someone who loved and was loved and was a member of a family and part of a community.
D.
 How is justice achieved? 
 

 This may not be an easy question to answer satisfactorily for Ms. Vivancos’ family and friends, but I will try by explaining the process:
•


First, there was a trial. The killing itself was admitted almost from the start but the issue of intent was contested. Mr. Jolicoeur, through his counsel, presented a vigorous and competent defence to the issue of intent, as he was entitled to do. The Crown was put to the test of proving intent beyond a reasonable doubt. After a trial on the merits of the intent issue, Mr. Jolicoeur was found guilty and convicted of second-degree murder.
•


Second, I remind everyone that sentencing is not an exercise in vengeance or retribution. That is not the kind of society we live in. Sentencing is not an attempt to balance the scales because they can never be balanced. Rather, my job as the sentencing judge is to determine a sentence that accords with the principles and objectives set out in the law, of which I will speak more in a moment.
•


Third, the mandatory and inescapable sentence under section 235(1) of the Criminal Code for second-degree murder is life in prison. I have no discretion here. I must impose a sentence of life imprisonment. What we are concerned with in this hearing is parole ineligibility, a period of time which falls between a minimum of 10 years and a maximum of 25 years, as set out in section 745(c) of the Criminal Code. It is the identification of the date, years down the road, on which Mr. Jolicoeur will have the ability, for the first time, to apply for parole. Parole is not automatic. The application may be approved or not approved by the Parole Board of Canada. It is their decision based on criteria that they establish and a process prescribed by federal law. Mr. Jolicoeur may have to apply multiple times. Even if granted parole, Mr. Jolicoeur will be under supervision with conditions for the rest of his life. Breach of those conditions can result in parole being revoked and the offender returned to prison. As Ms. Fraser rightly pointed out, Mr. Jolicoeur will always be subject to a term of imprisonment for life.
E.
 Facts
 

 I am not going to recount the facts of the offence in detail because they are well familiar to everyone here and described in full in my decision at 2022 ABQB 370. Basically, in the context of a drug transaction, Mr. Jolicoeur met with Ms. Vivancos near a pond off a rural road where he struck her over the head numerous times with a metal weapon of some sort. The injuries and her manner of death are described in paragraphs 43 through 53 of the written decision. At paragraph 83, I concluded that Mr. Jolicoeur intended to cause Ms. Vivancos bodily harm that he knew was so serious and dangerous that it would likely cause her death, that he was reckless in so doing and did in fact cause her death, resulting in the finding of second-degree murder. I also found that his post-offence actions amounted to attempts to conceal what he had done.
F.
 Objectives of Sentencing
 

 The law provides that the fundamental purposes of sentencing are to:
•


protect everyone,
•


make sure that our laws are respected, and
•


maintain a just, peaceful and safe society.
 

 That is done through the Court imposing sentences that will:
•


express society’s disapproval, or denunciation, of unlawful conduct;
•


deter the offender and others from committing offences,
•


separate offenders from society where necessary,
•


help the offender become a better and more productive person, and
•


help the offender take responsibility and acknowledge the harm done to victims or to the community: Criminal Code, section 718.
 

 It is also fundamental that a sentence is proportionate to the gravity, or seriousness, of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender (Criminal Code, section 718.1). As I mentioned earlier, I have no discretion here in terms of the term of imprisonment since the Criminal Code mandates a sentence of life imprisonment. The life sentence is appropriate because the crime is the second most serious crime in the Criminal Code only after first-degree murder, resulted in intentional loss of life of another and Mr. Jolicoeur is solely and wholly responsible. In the case of second-degree murder, the purposes and objectives of sentencing are also achieved through consideration of the period of parole ineligibility, which is part of the sentence.
 

 Further,
•


the sentence must be rational, or make sense,
•


focus on the person before the Court, and
•


demonstrate parity in that similar circumstances should attract similar sentences.
 

 Overall, the objectives must be tempered by restraint and common humanity.
 

 In determining parole ineligibility, section 745.4 directs that the minimum period of parole ineligibility of 10 years may be replaced by a different number not to exceed 25 years, as I deem fit in the circumstances, having regard to:
•


the character of the offender,
•


the nature of the offence, and
•


the circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence.
G.
 Crown Position
 

 The Crown’s position is that Mr. Jolicoeur should be ineligible for parole for a period of 14 years. I summarize the main points of argument, with the cases cited, as follows:
•


The Supreme Court of Canada has directed that the power to extend the period of parole ineligibility beyond the 10-year minimum need not be sparingly used and that it would not be unusual to do so: R v Bernard, 2017 NSSC 129 at para 31 citing R v Shropshire, 1995 CanLII 47 (SCC), [1995] 4 SCR 227.
•


Mr. Jolicoeur’s attempt at a guilty plea to manslaughter at the outset of the trial has no value and amounts to an “evidential nothing” per R v Ryan, 2014 ABCA 286 at paras 30-37.
•


The brutality and viciousness of the attack and manner of death, which speak to the nature of the offence, are aggravating. The victim’s head was the target and the attack was of prolonged duration. As comparator cases, the Crown cited R v Miel, 2017 BCSC 1446 at para 69 (14 years of ineligibility) and Bernard at para 41 (also 14 years).
•


In terms of character of the offender and future dangerousness, there is no real explanation or contributing factors as to why the offence occurred, i. e. there is an absence of a psychological reason such as mental illness or even drug addiction. This lack of explanation, or unpredictability, might be an indicator of character or future dangerousness. Here, the comments of Iacobucci J in Shropshire at pp 245-248 are relevant regarding the “absence of an explanation of attenuating factors” in the context of “the Court and public clearly having an interest in knowing why a human life was taken by an offender.”
•


Mr. Jolicoeur’s post-offence conduct in attempting to conceal his crime by first trying to set Ms. Vivancos’ vehicle on fire and then pushing it onto the pond ice so that it would break through and submerge, although ineffectual, are nonetheless aggravating. This activity speaks to the circumstances surrounding the offence’s commission. The Crown cites R v Martel, 2011 ABCA 225 for the proposition that post-offence conduct to hide culpability not only elevates the proper range of parole ineligibility beyond that which would apply if one looked at the killing alone. In that case, post-offence conduct was sufficiently significant to elevate parole ineligibility beyond 12 years – 15 years was substituted. Note, however, that the statutory aggravating factor of spousal violence was present in Martel, and no remorse or rather, the opposite of remorse, was shown.
•


The Crown submits that the offence took place in the context of other criminal activity (namely, a drug transaction), speaking to the circumstances of the commission of the offence, which is also aggravating. Ms. Fraser referred to Ryan where at para 58 the Court says: “Given the facts here, it is evident that the murder took place against the backdrop of a criminal enterprise involving Ryan and the victim.” The criminal enterprise in that case was the sale of illegal drugs. Ryan was thinking of killing the victim and then did kill him as reprisal for stealing drugs from him. It was aggravating that Ryan also took steps to dispose of the body and other evidence and he had a measure of foresight, having calculated the possibility of killing the victim by arming himself with a gun. A parole ineligibility period of 13 years was increased to 17 years.
•


Mr. Jolicoeur demonstrated high moral culpability in failing to call for medical assistance after the attack. The Crown cited R v Bennight, 2012 BCC 461 in which an 18-year period of parole ineligibility was upheld where the offender subjected the victim, a vulnerable middle-aged woman, to “a vicious beating of astonishing brutality” that resulted in her death, before calling 911 with a fabricated story. The offender had a history of brain damage which indicated future dangerousness.
•


The Crown concedes that Mr. Jolicoeur has shown some remorse and some acceptance of responsibility by way of his early voluntary confession and making all reasonable trial admissions, but these actions do not justify a sentence reduced from a proportional one that fits the gravity of the offence and degree of responsibility: Ryan at para 36.
•


There has been significant impact on friends and family as shown through the victim impact statements. In sum, a parole ineligibility period of 14 years would be proportional to the gravity of the offence and in line with similar cases as a matter of parity.
H.
 Defence position
 

 The Defence, on the other hand, submits that the appropriate period of parole ineligibility should be set at 10 years. I summarize the main arguments as follows:
•


The Defence concedes that the brutality of the act and that post-offence conduct in attempting to cover up the crime are aggravating factors.
•


The Defence submits it is only a borderline aggravating factor that the murder was committed while Mr. Jolicoeur was engaged in other criminal activity, namely a drug transaction.
•


Ms. Lind points to the absence of other aggravating factors, statutory or otherwise, that would behoove the Court to extend the parole ineligibility period. Nothing in Mr. Jolicoeur’s background or character suggests that he is an inherently dangerous person and that lengthier incarceration is necessary to protect society. He has no criminal record, and has led a mostly pro-social life, including being productively employed for most of his adult life, and assuming a parental role in respect of his partner’s children, as well as having supported his own children.
•


In terms of mitigation, the Defence submits that Mr. Jolicoeur’s co-operation with police and trial admissions enabled both the investigation and subsequent prosecution, and focused the trial on the central issue of intent. 
•


Ms. Lind also submits that Mr. Jolicoeur has significant potential for rehabilitation, as shown by the rehabilitative and self-improvement steps he has taken since being in remand. He is also genuinely remorseful. 
•


Ms. Lind further submits on his behalf that provocation or near-provocation is an attenuating factor. She also suggests that Mr. Jolicoeur was under the influence of cocaine when committing the crime and that his drug issue has now been addressed.
•


Finally, Ms. Lind contends that the onerous bail conditions imposed on Mr. Jolicoeur during the pre-trial stage should be taken into account in determining the period of parole ineligibility in accordance with the reasoning of Gates J in R v Ledesma, 2019 ABQB 204 at paras 55 & 56. Ms. Fraser responded that the bail conditions were not so onerous as to merit a form of credit to be applied to the parole ineligibility period.
•


In summation, the Defence suggested that the brutality of the attack and the post-offence conduct might suggest a range of 12 to 13 years for parole ineligibility in this case, but that mitigating factors including some 26 months of house arrest should lead the Court to conclude that the minimum 10 years of parole ineligibility is appropriate here.
I.

 Cases
 

 Both sides submitted a number of legal cases for me to consider. The legal principles from cases decided by the Supreme Court of Canada and the Court of Appeal of Alberta are binding upon me. Otherwise, these cases provide a form of guidance to me in terms of the actual length of parole ineligibility. Sentencing, by its very nature, is an individualized and contextualized process. The cases assist with the identification of an appropriate range and the factors that may be applied. But no one reported case is exactly like the case before me.
 

 The Court of Appeal aptly noted in R v Shaw, 2019 ABCA 106 at para 27:
Though some comparison to precedents can be useful as a check on parity, it must be remembered that no two cases present an identical mix of factors. Sentencing is driven by principles, not comparators: R v Souvie, 2018 ABCA 148 at paras 42 to 44.
 

 While providing comparator cases is useful in terms of guidance, ultimately the decision I make is particular to the individual before the Court and the offence committed.
 

 This notion of an individualized and contextualized process is codified in section 745.4 Criminal Code which relates specifically to convictions for second-degree murder. In this regard, the Court of Appeal in Ryan at para 47 states that, in a case such as this:
The judge is to have regard to (1) the character of the offender; (2) the nature of the offence; and (3) the circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence. The section [745.4] does not define the scope of those three areas, nor does it weigh any considerations either within or between those areas. That Parliament would leave the scope of discretion broad is no surprise. The potential variation of facts, both aggravating and mitigating, within each area is as large as human behaviour can imagine.
 

 The Supreme Court of Canada put it this way at para 29 of Shropshire:
… In permitting a sliding scale of parole ineligibility, Parliament intended to recognize that, within the category of second-degree murder, there will be a broad range of seriousness reflecting varying degrees of moral culpability. 
 

 I also note that the three categories listed above are not necessarily discrete and may overlap. This would be particularly so with regard to the latter two.
 

 It is also fair to say that in the legal cases submitted different factors were relevant, although the cases all dealt with brutal forms of second-degree murder. In some cases, whether provided by the Crown or Defence, that pointed to a higher parole ineligibility, there were aggravating factors not present in this case. Similarly, in some cases submitted by the Defence suggesting a lower parole ineligibility, there are mitigating factors not relevant here. By way of example:
•


In Ryan, although the offender was more youthful than Mr. Jolicoeur, he had a criminal record and was no stranger to crime. The murder involved a measure of foresight when the offender armed himself with a gun. The Court of Appeal noted the context of “drug crime involving the use of firearms for enforcement or revenge”. A parole ineligibility period of 17 years was imposed.
•


In Martel, the offender killed his domestic partner, made a two-minute video of her dying moments, lied to police about his involvement for two months and rather than show remorse, he exhibited the opposite of remorse, resulting in high moral blameworthiness. The parole ineligibility was elevated from 12 years to 15 years by the Court of Appeal.
•


In Bennight, where the British Columbia Court of Appeal upheld a parole ineligibility of 18 years, the offender was found to be “unpredictably dangerous”.
•


In Bernard, the Nova Scotia Supreme Court imposed parole ineligibility at 14 years for an offender with a criminal record and an unaddressed alcohol addiction.
•


In R v Sinclair, 2019 ABQB 652, cited by the Defence, parole ineligibility of 13 years was imposed for a brutal stabbing murder in which the offender killed an underage victim and then had sex with her dead body.
 
 

 The Defence urged me to consider these authorities:
•


Ledesma – where 12 years of parole ineligibility was imposed in respect of a planned robbery in which money and drugs were stolen from the victim, who was shot twice in the back. The offender had a criminal record, put innocent bystanders at risk during the shooting and engaged in post-offence cover-up.
•


R v Reitmeier, 2016 ABCA 269, a 13-year parole ineligibility period was upheld for the offender’s role in a “murderous assault of a defenceless person by two strangers, simply for the fun of it”. The victim suffered numerous injuries not unlike those sustained by Ms. Vivancos in this case. Six days later, the offender turned himself into police. The period of parole ineligibility was set at 12 years. The Court of Appeal did note that the Crown’s position of 15 years was arguable in this case.
•


In R v Shaw, 2019, ABCA 106, the offender dispatched the victim with two or three hammer blows to the head. Thereafter, he fled the province, concocted a story about how the victim had died, tried to put forward a false alibi and “offered a conveniently shifting series of exculpatory explanations.” The Court of Appeal upheld the parole ineligibility period of 13 years.
•


In R v Bramley, 2014 ABQB 179, the offender lethally and inexplicably stabbed his roommate to death and made attempts to clean up the blood and conceal evidence. The victim was struck 25 times in the head and back with a Phillips head screwdriver. He was stabbed multiple times in the eye, neck and chest with a knife; the two stab wounds to the chest, severing the pulmonary trunk and aorta, were fatal. When the offender left the room, the victim was on his knees trying to get up. The offender did turn himself into police but at sentencing offered no explanation or remorse for the murder. The period of parole ineligibility was set at 12 years.
•


R v Maciel, 2007 ONCA 496 - in which the Court imposed parole ineligibility of 12 years where the offender shot the deceased 7 times in a drug enforcement killing and, even at age 20 at the time of the offence, had been a lawless and violent person, completely enmeshed in a criminal lifestyle. However, as Ms. Fraser rightly pointed out, the offender had completely turned his life around between the date of the offence and the day of sentencing, gaining significant work skills and personal insight and finding spiritual comfort. His character, for the purposes of the section 745.4 analysis, had completely changed for the better.
•


In R v Soosay, the offender, who participated in a violent beating death, had a criminal record for violence, but had undertaken some rehabilitative measures such as undergoing the Boot Camp in remand, taking anger management and parenting courses and working in the laundry. Justice Renke also said that Mr. Soosay’s background should be understood in light of Gladue factors, which are not present here. The 13-year period of parole ineligibility was imposed in those factual circumstances.
•


In R v Lewis, 2012 ONSC 2488, the victim was lured to a location on a pretext where several armed men awaited him, ambushed, confined, beat and then shot him to death. The victim sustained 11 gunshot wounds. The trial judge described the crime as a “vicious and cold-blooded murder”, made worse by the fact the offender had previous firearm convictions and was subject to a weapons prohibition at the time. A period of parole ineligibility of 12 years was imposed; however, the Crown would likely note that this case involved a jury recommendation of 10 years of parole ineligibility and the jury’s implicit finding that the offender was not the one who fired the weapon.
•


In R v KDS, 2021 ABQB 934, Justice Gill imposed a parole ineligibility period of 13 years for a murder involving gratuitous violence that was committed in the presence of another family member.
•


In R v Whitlock, 2017 BCSC 1998, a 12-year parole ineligibility period was imposed for the offender’s killing of his mother in which either blunt force injuries to the head or sharp force injuries to the neck could have caused death. In both these cases, Ms. Fraser suggests that untreated mental illness was an attenuating factor.
 

 In all, Ms. Lind cited 21 authorities which she suggests support a parole ineligibility period in this case in the lower range. Ms. Fraser points out that, of those cases, in Shropshire, Ledesma, Soosay, Maciel, Lewis, and Sinclair, as well as R v Tocharchuk, 2004 MBCA 46, R v Cabrera, 2021 ABCA 291, R v Steirs, 2010 ONCA 656, and R v Osei-Agyemang, 2011 ABCA 2, the offender in each case was under the age of 26 and therefore youthful or relatively youthful. Mr. Jolicoeur, on the other hand, at 36 years of age at time of offence, is not youthful and these cases are all therefore distinguishable on that fact. Ms. Fraser was, I think, referring to the comments of Justice Picard in Ryan at para 54 that the de facto 10-year median for parole ineligibility emerging from the caselaw results from the preponderance of younger offenders with no records and reasonable prospects ahead of them. Furthermore, in R v Diep, 2005 ABQB 81, the offender was in his late 50s at the time of sentencing and had attempted suicide following his conviction for second-degree murder in the single stab wound death of his wife, and therefore the case (10 year minimum imposed) is not an apt comparator.
 

 I now turn my attention to the components of section 745.4.
J.

The Nature of the Offence
 

 To be sure, as I detailed in the previous written decision, this killing was vicious and brutal. The Crown says that cases such as Cerra and Miel point to a parole ineligibility interval in the higher end of the range where this aggravating factor is prominent. I noted in para 83 of the written decision, second bullet point, that Mr. Jolicoeur was certainly persistent in his attack, but it is unknown how long it took. The Court in Cerra notes at para 28 that Mr. Cerra did not kill the victim in a sudden burst of anger or on an impulse. Rather, he beat her and then drowned her in the course of a drawn-out episode. While I accept that the brutality of the attack is an aggravating factor, I did not make a trial finding that Mr. Jolicoeur had set out to kill Ms. Vivancos. I accept that something went wrong during their interaction that evening that precipitated an attack that appears to have occurred spontaneously or impulsively.
K.
 The Circumstances of the Commission of the Offence
Post-Offence Conduct
 

 I readily accept that post-offence conduct intended to cover up the crime is an aggravating factor as cases such as Ryan, Martel and Shaw suggest. I consider Mr. Jolicoeur’s failure to alert authorities immediately after the incident or call for medical assistance to be part of the same post-offence cover-up. My finding at para 97, page 22, fourth bullet point, is that Mr. Jolicoeur already knew she was dead at the time he was trying to set the fire or sink the vehicle in the pond. 
Other Criminal Activity
 

 The Crown also suggested as an aggravating factor the context in which the murder took place, that is, that Mr. Jolicoeur was engaged in another illegal activity when committing the murder. That illegal activity would be the drug transaction. I recognize in Shropshire the Court mentions that the period of parole ineligibility could be increased when the murder is committed in the course of another crime, particularly a crime of violence. But here, I tend to agree with Ms. Lind that as an aggravating factor, the fact of the drug transaction is borderline aggravating at best. I made no finding that Mr. Jolicoeur had planned to rob Ms. Vivancos that night. Although Mr. Jolicoeur did take Ms. Vivancos’ drugs and use them, the taking of her cell phone and the purse containing the drugs again was part of the post-offence cover-up. Unlike in Ryan, there is no finding that this was a drug enforcement murder or retaliation murder. In Shropshire, while the killing remained unexplained by the offender, there was evidence from a witness that the offender immediately after the event had shouted that the killing was at the behest of a drug associate.
Provocation or Near-Provocation
 

 I do not accept that a form of provocation or near-provocation is a circumstance that mitigates here. At para 128 of my earlier written decision, I made the express finding that provocation as a defence had been disproven beyond a reasonable doubt for three reasons. More to the point, at para 131, I expressed skepticism as to whether Ms. Vivancos had initiated the incident by attacking Mr. Jolicoeur in an unprovoked manner while the two of them were in the car, and at para 112 I made the finding that the utterances attributed to Ms. Vivancos were understandable and not unexpected in the circumstances. Therefore, such utterances would not have been capable of provoking Mr. Jolicoeur even in the sense used during the sentencing.
Drug Intoxication or Addiction; Drug-Seeking Behaviour
 

 The Defence suggested to me that Mr. Jolicoeur was either high on drugs or using cocaine that day. This suggestion was not put to me as a circumstance that would reduce moral culpability but rather as a contributing factor to the incident that has now been addressed by Mr. Jolicoeur.
 

 The Crown responded by saying there was no evidentiary foundation for an assertion that Mr. Jolicoeur was either high on drugs or even using cocaine on the evening in question. Rather, the evidence, such as it was, was that Mr. Jolicoeur was purchasing cocaine from Ms. Vivancos for resale to his own customer.
 

 Ms. Lind suggested that it was open to me to find Mr. Jolicoeur’s drug intake was a contributing factor because of my adverse credibility findings against Mr. Jolicoeur. I had, at para 97, page 24 expressed grave doubt about whether this customer even existed. The implication is, of course, that if no customer existed then the cocaine he was purchasing from Ms. Vivancos must have been for himself.
 

 It was Mr. Jolicoeur’s involvement in the drug world, as a consumer, that led him to his fatal encounter with Ms. Vivancos. Now that Mr. Jolicoeur has taken steps to address his issues with drugs, it is argued, there is little or no likelihood that violent behaviour on his part will be repeated. This argument speaks to future dangerousness which is a factor for the Court’s consideration in determining parole ineligibility: Ryan at para 39. 
 

 There is a finding at para 40 of Ryan that the offender was “a criminalized addict with dangerous impulses” at the time of the offence. At Mr. Jolicoeur’s trial, there was certainly evidence that Mr. Jolicoeur was a cocaine user and may have been an addict at one time. In the Defence’s written submissions for sentencing, there is a reference from his partner to both Mr. Jolicoeur’s addiction to drugs and his selling of drugs.
 

 From this, I can say that Mr. Jolicoeur’s involvement in the drug world, even if only as a customer, was the main factor leading to the fatal encounter with Ms. Vivancos. I also see that during remand, Mr. Jolicoeur has availed himself of Alcoholics Anonymous/Narcotics Anonymous, thereby taking steps to address this factor.
 

 With this factor, the categories of circumstances of commission and character of the offender overlap. Mr. Jolicoeur’s involvement in the drug world is a circumstance of commission while recognizing and taking steps to overcome these drug issues reflect on his character.
 

 This factor is also a response to Ms. Fraser’s assertion that there are no contributing reasons for the killing, such as drug addiction or mental illness, which therefore points to unpredictability and future dangerousness. This argument may flow from paras 40 to 42 of Shropshire in which the Supreme Court of Canada notes that, post-conviction, an offender seeking the least severe sentence no longer has a constitutional right to silence and has somewhat of an obligation to take an active role in the sentencing process, which may involve explaining why the offence occurred. Here, the Supreme Court of Canada was not taking issue with the sentencing judge’s focus on the offender’s silence, from arrest through sentencing, as to why he engaged in an execution-style murder of the victim, as an aggravating factor. The sentencing judge was clearly troubled by the random nature of the killing in Shropshire (at page 246; see also comments of Renke J in Soosay at paras 82 & 83 regarding “randomness” as an aggravating factor).
 

 The search for an explanation for a seemingly irrational act is natural. An explanation might involve discerning a motive or cause for the violent act. The absence of such an explanation was disconcerting to the sentencing judge in Shropshire.
 

 In the case before me, Mr. Jolicoeur’s actions were not random, and he was far from silent. During his police interviews, he gave at least three explanations of his conduct: self-defence, provocation and trying to prevent Ms. Vivancos from using her cell phone. At trial, the Defence only asserted the second explanation while the Crown relied on the third. Ultimately, I accepted the Crown’s view that Mr. Jolicoeur tried to stop Ms. Vivancos from using her cell phone. So, there is an explanation of sorts for why the attack took place.
 

 But overall, the entire scenario unfolded because Mr. Jolicoeur was looking to Ms. Vivancos for drugs. While Mr. Jolicoeur’s drug-seeking behaviour does not explain the killing itself, it does explain why he was at the pond in the first place, with the lethal actions then spontaneously arising. The Defence’s point here is, I think, that the drug-seeking behaviour was an antecedent to the incident and one which Mr. Jolicoeur has taken steps to address, thus reducing or eliminating the risk of future dangerousness. I take the point.
 

 Why Mr. Jolicoeur chose to use deadly force, in the circumstances, remains inexplicable.
Confession & Cooperation
 

 Similarly, Mr. Jolicoeur’s cooperation with authorities is either a circumstance of commission or circumstance of the offender. I agree, of course, that his attempted guilty plea to manslaughter at the outset of the trial was, as the Court of Appeal found in Ryan, an evidential nothing and by itself not a mitigating factor. However, we must look at what Mr. Jolicoeur actually did:
•


although initially proffering a false alibi, Mr. Jolicoeur did on his own initiative and at next opportunity, voluntarily attend with police and confess his actions in causing Ms. Vivancos’ death;
•


at para 90, I found that the voluntary confession was both a function of conscience and self-interest;
•


that confession and co-operation with police dispensed with the need for further investigation;
•


at trial, Mr. Jolicoeur made extensive admissions, save with respect to intent, which dispensed with formal proof of the actus reus, saved both prosecution and Court time, and dispensed with the need to call certain witnesses;
•


Mr. Jolicoeur has always taken responsibility, except for that first interview, for the death and disputed with the authorities only on the level of intent, which he was entitled to do;
•


I said at para 88 that I would give Mr. Jolicoeur his due for doing all of that and that his co-operation and admissions were worth something in the legal process.
•


Here, it is important to note the distinction between this case and the Ryan case, where the Court of Appeal felt the attempted guilty plea to manslaughter amounted to nothing. That is because the Court of Appeal noted at para 36:
… The extent of Ryan’s acknowledgement of responsibility was that of an actus reus the Crown clearly could prove beyond a reasonable doubt. Ryan’s aim was to avoid the life sentence which, on the evidence, was otherwise unavoidable…
•


That is certainly a different circumstance than we have in Mr. Jolicoeur’s case. There was no forensic evidence linking Mr. Jolicoeur to the murder. When Mr. Jolicoeur acknowledged responsibility, the Crown was not in a position to clearly prove the actus reus beyond a reasonable doubt. Mr. Jolicoeur put the Crown in that position by his confession and subsequent admissions.
•


While it is conceivable that police eventually may have been able to somehow connect Mr. Jolicoeur with Ms. Vivancos’ death, they were spared that exercise.
 

 In this regard, I adopt the comments of Justice Renke at paras 94 and 95 of Soosay:
 Mr. Soosay did not plead guilty. He exercised his constitutional right to trial.
 Mr. Soosay did cooperate in the focusing of the trial. With the Crown’s consent, he elected to be tried by judge alone. This had the effect of saving significant time and resources for the administration of justice and for those who would have sat as jury members. Mr. Soosay gave a statement to the police and did not challenge its admissibility. Mr. Soosay accepted a statement of admitted facts that significantly shortened trial time. These factors have a mitigating effect on Mr. Soosay’s punishment.
 

 I conclude that Mr. Jolicoeur’s co-operation did have the effect of focusing the trial, which was concerned solely with the issue of intent. Consequently, this aspect should have some mitigating effect on the punishment.
L.
 Character of the Offender
Future Dangerousness
 

 I accept that there is nothing in Mr. Jolicoeur’s background, aside from the offence itself, to suggest he presents a risk of future dangerousness for violent behaviour. Apart from involvement in the drug world, he has led a pro-social life characterized by mostly full employment in a trade and providing for his family. The letters presented by his family members indicate that the offence was out of character. While such letters are expected to be favourable to the offender, there is really nothing to controvert what they say.
 

 The offence itself arose from Mr. Jolicoeur’s involvement with drugs. The material before me indicates that he has taken steps to stay out of that world. I conclude therefore that Mr. Jolicoeur is not a dangerous person such that his continued imprisonment through a longer parole ineligibility is necessary to protect society.
Rehabilitative Potential
 

 Mr. Jolicoeur’s partner and his family remain supportive. While in remand, Mr. Jolicoeur has made the best of his time. He has engaged in the Boot Camp, and taken a number of courses including Anger Management, Leadership Enhancement and Development Skills, Public Law, Math 20-2, and Spiritual Health and Aboriginal Resources for Empowerment. He has engaged as a laundry worker at ERC, has gained the knowledge of industrial washing machines and dryers and is reported to be a good worker and mentor. His Boot Camp evaluator reports that Mr. Jolicoeur has made significant strides in personal growth, sobriety and physical health and looks to continue that growth.
 

 I accept that Mr. Jolicoeur has significant prospects for full rehabilitation.
Remorse
 

 Moreover, Mr. Jolicoeur has expressed remorse from the outset, as I found at paragraph 92 of the trial decision. During sentencing, Mr. Jolicoeur addressed the Court and articulated, as best he could, his sorrow and regret over what he did. I perceived this to be genuine.
 

 His significant potential for rehabilitation and remorse are mitigating factors.
Mitigating Effect of Onerous Bail Conditions
 

 There is next the matter of whether the bail conditions imposed were so onerous that they merit some reduction in parole ineligibility, such as in Ledesma. Mr. Jolicoeur was under house arrest for 26 months but there were exceptions that were granted that included being able to walk his young children to school and working a booth at a farmers’ market. While Mr. Jolicoeur’s bail period was considerably longer than Mr. Ledesma’s, the conditions were less onerous. Mr. Jolicoeur was not under electronic monitoring, and he was given some liberties. I am aware that the law does not permit a reduction of parole ineligibility commensurate with the duration of the bail conditions, but I will keep the quality of the bail conditions in mind, as well as the fact that Mr. Jolicoeur did well while on bail which is relevant to his rehabilitation potential and the risk that he presents to the public in future: Ledesma at para 56.
M.
Ruling
 

 Given the aggravating factors in this case, namely the brutal nature of the offence and the cover-up attempts afterward, without more, I would have imposed a parole ineligibility period of 14 years. In my view, this would have been necessary, even taking into account the negligible risk for future violent behaviour on Mr. Jolicoeur’s part, as an expression of deterrence and denunciation.
 

 In terms of mitigation, I have factored into the equation the fact of Mr. Jolicoeur’s co-operation with the police during the investigation and the Crown during his own prosecution, his significant rehabilitative potential, including leaving the drug world, and the genuine remorse he carries with him.
 

 In the result, I set the period of parole ineligibility at 12 years. In that decision, I have considered the impact of bail conditions, but I have concluded that reducing parole ineligibility any further would not carry the weight of deterrence and denunciation that this case demands. 
 

 To a lesser extent, I have also had regard to the comments of Picard JA in Ryan that the 10-year median is the place of more youthful offenders.
 

 Here, the crime is as serious as it gets, and Mr. Jolicoeur was solely and wholly responsible for Ms. Vivancos’ death. I have reviewed and heard submissions regarding the legal cases presented to me. I have concluded that a parole ineligibility duration of 12 years reflects proportionality and parity and advances the objectives of sentencing.
 

 Before I ask you to stand up and formally pronounce the sentence, I wish to take a moment to speak to you directly, Mr. Jolicoeur.
 

 Despite a very able sentencing case put forward by the Crown, I have shown restraint here. That is something you denied to Ms. Vivancos. Furthermore, by imposing the parole ineligibility duration that I have, I have given you hope for the future, recognizing that the ultimate decision regarding whether you ever regain your liberty is up to the Parole Board of Canada. You took hope away from Ms. Vivancos. In those last moments, she must have realized she was going to die, and she must have been terrified. You just didn’t deprive her of hope, you took everything from her, her whole life, her whole future.
 

 It is right that you feel remorse for you have done the worst thing that someone can do to another human being. Try as I might, I cannot understand why this happened. You could have gotten into your work van and driven away from that pond without so much as touching her. If you wanted to take her cell phone away from her to prevent her from calling, you could easily have done that without harming her. You are a big, strapping man and she was a woman smaller than you. What you have done, and the way you did it, is beyond human comprehension.
 

 You yourself during one of your police interviews described Ms. Vivancos as beautiful. I think you meant physically beautiful. You heard what her family and friends had to say. She was a beautiful person in her soul. That is the life you took.
 

 You told me three weeks ago that you will spend the rest of your life trying to make things better. Atonement is all you have left to offer, Mr. Jolicoeur. In order to honour the life you have taken, you must devote the rest of your life to being as good a person as you can be and making things better.
 
 

 Stand-up, Mr. Jolicoeur. On the charge of second-degree murder for which you have been convicted, I sentence you to:
•


Life imprisonment;
•


with parole ineligibility for a period of 12 years.
 

 I further impose a lifetime weapons prohibition order, under section 109(2) of the Criminal Code, and I order you, Mr. Jolicoeur, to provide a sample of your DNA under section 487.051 of the Criminal Code.
 

 Finally, there will be an order for the return of seized exhibits to their lawful owners after the appeal period and forfeiture of any remaining exhibits 90 days thereafter.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/kb/2023abkb26.html
 



Nickolas Donovan Ellis (“Mr. Ellis” or the “Accused”) is charged on a 17 count Amended Indictment with fraud, use or trafficking in forged documents, identity fraud (personation) and falsely representing himself to be a peace officer.
 



The Crown alleges that from February 2016 to March 2019, Mr. Ellis engaged in an elaborate scheme in which he presented several investment opportunities to eight of his friends, neighbours, and co-workers. The investment opportunities were interconnected with several investors participating in more than one opportunity. Some but not all these investment opportunities related in some way to Mr. Ellis’ interest in sports memorabilia and his actual or purported business and personal connections with at least one well known retired National Hockey League (NHL) player. The promoted investments all promised significant returns for minimal risk within a relatively short time. Some, but not all the investments purported to be “guaranteed” by Mr. Ellis.
 



The Crown submits that all the investment schemes were fraudulent and were perpetrated by Mr. Ellis using several deceptive practices including the use of forged documents and false email accounts.
 



The Crown asserts that because of the fraudulent conduct of Mr. Ellis, the Complainants have lost more than $1.7 million. The Crown seeks convictions on each of the counts on the Amended Indictment.
 



Mr. Ellis acknowledges permitting the Complainants to participate in a series of investment opportunities that were available to him during the relevant time. However, he denies that he knowingly participated in any deceptive practices or any fraudulent activity. Mr. Ellis submits that he may have been the victim of the fraudulent actions of others. 
 



Moreover, Mr. Ellis submits that the Crown case is based on evidence that is largely circumstantial and it has not met its onus to prove the elements of the offences beyond a reasonable doubt. Mr. Ellis seeks an acquittal on each of the counts on the Amended Indictment.
 



One of the counts on the Amended Indictment is unrelated to the investment schemes. That count charges that Mr. Ellis submitted claims for reimbursement of expenses to his employer and that those expenses were fraudulent. Mr. Ellis denies that the claims were fraudulent.
 



I conclude that the investment opportunities presented by Mr. Ellis were a house of cards built on a foundation of deception. None of the investment opportunities were real and all were designed to generate substantial funds for Mr. Ellis at the expense of the investors. For the reasons that follow, I find Mr. Ellis:
•


Guilty on each of the eight counts of fraud over $5,000 (counts 1, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 12 and 13),
•


Guilty on three counts of use or trafficking in a forged document (counts 19, 21 and 23), 
•


Guilty on three counts of identity fraud (counts 18, 20 and 22) and 
 



I find Mr. Ellis not guilty:
•


On the single count of attempted fraud over $5,000 (count 7), and
•


On the single count of fraud under $5,000 (count 15)
•


On the single count of falsely representing himself to be a peace officer (count 24) 

 II.



Legal Principles 
a)

Burden of Proof
 

 The starting point in any criminal trial is that the accused is presumed innocent until proven guilty. This means that a conviction can only be entered if the Crown has tendered sufficient evidence to prove the guilt of Mr. Ellis beyond a reasonable doubt. The burden remains on the Crown throughout the trial; it never shifts to the defence. Conversely, if a reasonable doubt exists as to the guilt of Mr. Ellis, he must be acquitted. 
 

 The Supreme Court of Canada in R v Lifchus, 1997 CanLII 319 (SCC), 3 SCR 320 and in R v Starr, 2000 SCC 40, explained that a reasonable doubt is a doubt that is based on reason and common sense that is logically connected to the evidence, or the absence of evidence. It is not a doubt that is based on sympathy or prejudice toward or against anyone. Proof beyond a reasonable doubt necessarily requires a higher level of proof than probable guilt, but it does not require proof to an absolute certainty. It does not require proof beyond any doubt, but rather proof beyond a doubt that is not imaginary or frivolous. 
b)
 Circumstantial Evidence
 

 The Crown relies on circumstantial evidence to prove some of the elements of the offences charged. In this regard, the Crown submits that the totality of the evidence, when properly assessed, permits inferences to be made to support a finding of guilt on each of the counts on the Amended Indictment.
 

 The Supreme Court of Canada in R v Villaroman, 2016 SCC 33 (Villaroman) provided guidance in relation to circumstantial evidence. The Court explained the relationship between proof by circumstantial evidence and the requirement of proof beyond reasonable doubt. Villaroman makes it clear that the Court must consider whether any inference urged by the Crown is the only reasonable inference that may be drawn from the circumstantial evidence. The Crown must negative other “reasonable possibilities”; it does not, however, need to negative “every possible conjecture ... which might be consistent with the innocence of the accused”: Villaroman at para 37. The Supreme Court also noted that “inferences must be reasonable given the evidence and the absence of evidence, assessed logically, and in light of human experience and common sense”: para 36. Alternative inferences must be reasonable and rational, not just possible: R v Lazzaro, 2016 ABCA 353 at para 8, citing R v Dipnarine, 2014 ABCA 328.
 

 When assessing circumstantial evidence, it is important to consider the totality of the objective facts proven by the evidence along with the absence of evidence. “A gap in the evidence, or an absence of evidence, may support a reasonable inference other than guilt”: R v Bjornson, 2018 ABCA 282 at para 22 (Bjornson). An accused is not required to provide explanations other than guilt, as this wrongly puts an obligation on an accused to prove facts, and “is contrary to the rule that whether there is a reasonable doubt is assessed by considering all the evidence”: Bjornson at paras 22-23; R v King 2020 ABCA 425 at para 30.
 

 In R v Lehner, 2020 ABCA 248 at paras 28 and 29, the Court of Appeal provided a useful summary of these principles:
… Villaroman is an excellent reminder to a trier of fact about too readily drawing inferences of guilt by overlooking reasonable alternative inferences. The trier of fact is mandated to consider other plausible theories and other reasonable possibilities that are inconsistent with guilt. The Crown may need to negative those reasonable possibilities, but certainly does not need to negative every possible conjecture which might be consistent with the innocence of the accused. 
Although the line between plausible theory and speculation is not always easy to draw, the basic question is whether the circumstantial evidence, viewed logically and in light of human experience, is reasonably capable of supporting an inference other than the guilt of the accused. ...
It was noted in Villaroman that “‘[c]ircumstantial evidence does not have to totally exclude other conceivable inferences’; that the trier of fact should not act on alternative interpretations of the circumstances that it considers to be unreasonable; and that alternative inferences must be reasonable, not just possible”: at para 42, citing R v Dipnarine at paras 22 and 24-25.
 

 Where the criteria in Villaroman are properly applied, circumstantial evidence can be used to prove one or more of the elements of an offence, including that the accused person before the court was the person who committed the offence: R v Hassan Ali, 2021 ABCA 21; R v Eide, 2021 ABCA 70; R v Habte, 2020 ABCA 476, R v Matchee 2019 ABCA 5; R v Brazeau, 2018 ABCA 170. 
c)

Elements of Fraud – s 380
 

 Eight of the counts on the Amended Indictment charge that Mr. Ellis committed fraud over $5,000 contrary to s 380(1)(a) of the Criminal Code, RSC 1985, c C-46 (the Code), which provides: 
380. FRAUD — (1) Every one who, by deceit, falsehood or other fraudulent means, whether or not it is a false pretence within the meaning of this Act, defrauds the public or any person, whether ascertained or not, of any property, money or valuable security or any service,
(a) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding fourteen years, where the subject-matter of the offence is a testamentary instrument or the value of the subject-matter of the offence exceeds five thousand dollars; or
 

 The actus reus of the offence is described by the Supreme Court in R v Olan 1978 CanLII 9 (SCC), 2 SCR 1175 and in R. v Théroux, 1993 CanLII 134 (SCC), 2 SCR 5 at para 16:
(i)




 the offence has two elements: dishonest act and deprivation;
(ii)



 the dishonest act is established by proof of deceit, falsehood or "other fraudulent means”;
(iii)



the element of deprivation is established by proof of detriment, prejudice, or risk of prejudice to the economic interests of the victim, caused by the dishonest act.
 

 The concept of “other fraudulent means” in s 380(1) was discussed in R v Zlatic 1993 CanLII 135 (SCC), 2 SCR 29 at para 31 where the Court noted that this category of fraud has been used to support convictions in several situations where deceit or falsehood cannot be shown. These situations have included the use of corporate funds for personal purposes, non-disclosure of important facts, exploiting the weakness of another, unauthorized diversion of funds, and unauthorized arrogation of funds or property. Zlatic cited the following authorities in support of those examples: R v Black and Whiteside, 1983 CanLII 3493 (ON CA); R v Shaw, 1983 CanLII 3584 (NB CA); R v Wagman, 1981 CanLII 3122 (ON CA); R v Rosen, 1979 CanLII 2867 (ON SC), R v Côté and Vézina (No. 2), 1982 CanLII 3874 (QC CA); R v Hansen, 1983 ABCA 68 (CanLII); R v Geddes, 1979 CanLII 2854 (MB CA); R v Currie & R v Bruce, 1984 CarswellOnt 1237 (ON CA), and R v Kirkwood, 1983 CanLII 1953 (ON CA). 
 

 In R v Iyer, 2020 ABCA 439 at para 46, the Court explained what is meant by “deprivation” within the meaning of s 380:
The element of deprivation is satisfied on proof of detriment, prejudice, or risk of prejudice to the economic interests of the victim. It is not essential that there be actual economic loss as the outcome of the fraud: Olan at 1182. Deprivation can also exist where an opportunity to prevent loss is taken away: see R v Gaetz, 1992 CanLII 2509 (NS CA), affirmed 1993 CanLII 82 (SCC), [1993] 3 SCR 645; or, where an opportunity to profit is extinguished: see R v Kirkwood, 1983 CanLII 1953 (ON CA).
 

 The mens rea of the offence is described by Justice McLachlin (as she then was) in Théroux at para 24:
The mens rea would then consist in the subjective awareness that one was undertaking a prohibited act (the deceit, falsehood or other dishonest act) which could cause deprivation in the sense of depriving another of property or putting that property at risk. If this is shown, the crime is complete. 
 

 Justice McLachlin also noted that no defence arises based only on the accused’s hope that the deprivation would not take place, or that the accused may have felt there was nothing wrong with what he or she was doing.
d)
 Elements of Use or Trafficking in Forged Documents – s 368
 

 Three of the counts on the Amended Indictment charge that Mr. Ellis used or trafficked in forged documents contrary to s 368(1)(a) of the Code that provides:
368.(1) Everyone commits an offence who, knowing or believing that a document is forged,
(a)
uses, deals with or acts on it as if it were genuine.
 

 To establish the offence the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the document was forged, that the accused knew it was forged and that he or she used, dealt with or acted on the document as if it were genuine. The offence does not require an intent to defraud or to cause prejudice: R v Valois, 1986 CanLII 55 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 278, at pp. 282-3; R v Sebo 1988 ABCA 200 (CanLII) (leave to appeal refused S.C.C.A. No. 309); Manning, Mewett & Sankoff, Criminal Law, 5th ed (LexisNexis) at ¶23.28-23.58.
e)

Elements of Personation (Identity Fraud) – s 403
 

 Three of the counts on the Amended Indictment charge that Mr. Ellis personated three different persons contrary to s 403(1) of the Code which provides:
403. IDENTITY FRAUD — (1) Everyone commits an offence who fraudulently personates another person, living or dead,
(a) with intent to gain advantage for themselves or another person;
(b) with intent to obtain any property or an interest in any property;
(c) with intent to cause disadvantage to the person being personated or another person; or
(d) with intent to avoid arrest or prosecution or to obstruct, pervert or defeat the course of justice.
(2) CLARIFICATION — For the purposes of subsection (1), personating a person includes pretending to be the person or using the person’s identity information — whether by itself or in combination with identity information pertaining to any person — as if it pertains to the person using it.
 

 The actus reus of the offence is that the accused person fraudulently personated a person. This can include an accused person pretending to be the person – s 403(2). It is not necessary that anything actually be obtained as a result of the personation and the offence can occur with or without an improper use of another person’s identity information. However, the person who is personated must be a real person, living or dead: Manning, Mewett & Sankoff at ¶23.134.
 

 The mens rea element is specified in subsections (a) to (d), and can be made out in any one of those ways. 
f)

 Elements of Impersonating a Peace Officer – s 130
 

 Mr. Ellis is charged with one count of impersonating a peace officer contrary to s 130 of the Code which provides that:
130. PERSONATING PEACE OFFICER — (1) Everyone commits an offence who
(a) falsely represents himself to be a peace officer or a public officer; or ...
 

 To obtain a conviction under this section the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused person made representations that he or she was a peace officer when in fact that was not the case. 
 

 The mens rea element requires that the Crown prove that the accused person intended to make the representations knowing that they were false.
g)

Assessment of Conflicting Evidence
 

 Mr. Ellis does not have an onus to prove anything. For this reason, he was not required to testify. Despite this, he elected to testify and provide the Court with evidence relating to his involvement with the events that give rise to the allegations against him. His evidence conflicts in many material ways with the evidence tendered by the Crown. It is therefore necessary to assess Mr. Ellis’ evidence in accordance with the direction of the Supreme Court in R v W(D), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), 1 SCR 742 (W(D)), as explained by R v Ryon, 2019 ABCA 36 at para 51 and R v Achuil, 2019 ABCA 299 at para 18. This direction is as follows:
 
(i) The burden of proof is on the Crown to establish the accused’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt and that burden remains on the Crown so that the accused person is never required to prove his innocence or disprove any of the evidence led by the Crown.
(ii) In that context, if the accused’s evidence denying complicity or guilt (or any other exculpatory evidence to that effect) is believed, or even if not believed still leaves the jury with a reasonable doubt that it may be true, then the jury is required to acquit.
(iii) While I must attempt to resolve conflicting evidence bearing on the guilt or innocence of the accused, a trial is not a credibility contest requiring me to decide that one of the conflicting versions is true. If, after careful consideration of all the evidence, I am unable to decide whom to believe, I must acquit. 
(iv) Even if I completely reject the accused’s evidence, I may not simply assume the Crown’s version of events must be true. Rather, I must carefully assess the evidence I do believe and decide whether that evidence persuades me beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused is guilty. Mere rejection of the accused’s evidence cannot be taken as proof of the accused’s guilt.
 

 Mr. Ellis testified that he used the monies invested by the Complainants to legitimately pay the persons who were required to be paid so that the investments could proceed. In addition, Mr. Ellis expressly denied most or all the allegations that have been made against him by the Crown. 
 

 To properly understand the evidence of Mr. Ellis and to put it in the proper context, it is important to consider the nature of the allegations that have been made against Mr. Ellis. For this reason, before I address the details of the evidence of Mr. Ellis, I will begin by identifying the individual investors and the amounts that they contributed to the investments. Thereafter, I will assess the evidence of Mr. Ellis and determine if he should be believed or whether, even if not believed, his evidence, along with the other exculpatory evidence, gives rise to reasonable doubt.
 III.



Some Background on the Investors
a)

The Investors
 

 Each of the investors had known Mr. Ellis for a relatively short period of time prior to making their investment. Some met Mr. Ellis for the first time when he moved to a residential community adjacent to the Northern Bear Golf Course south of Sherwood Park, Alberta in or about 2015. Other investors met Mr. Ellis when he began his employment with Wainbee Canada Inc (“Wainbee”) in September 2015 or when Mr. Ellis became the General Manager of Barcol Doors and Windows Ltd (Barcol) in September 2017. 


















 i.



Randy Blackburn
 

 Mr. Blackburn met Mr. Ellis in September 2015 when Mr. Ellis was hired by Wainbee as the VP for Saskatchewan and Alberta. Mr. Blackburn was a long-term employee of Wainbee, having worked there for more than 20 years. Very soon after Mr. Ellis arrived at Wainbee, he and Mr. Blackburn became friends. The friendship continued even after Mr. Ellis left Wainbee in July 2016. Mr. Blackburn described Mr. Ellis as his best friend.


















ii.



Terry McLean
 

 Mr. McLean is a millwright and businessman who owned and operated HTS Hydraulic Technical Service Inc (HTS) for 30 years until he sold the business to Wainbee effective December 31, 2015. Mr. McLean worked closely with Mr. Ellis in closing the transaction and for a period of six months after the sale of the business. This was to ensure a smooth transition of the HTS business operations into Wainbee and also to ensure the successful integration of the HTS staff into Wainbee. During their time working together Mr. Ellis and Mr. McLean also developed a good friendship.

















 iii.



Boris Makowecki
 

 Mr. Makowecki retired in 2014 from his position as Executive Vice President of Hyduk Energy Services Inc, a publicly traded corporation. Prior to that he was involved in several other business ventures. Since his retirement he has managed investments through his private holding companies including Makow Properties Corp Ltd (Makow Properties).
 

Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Ellis were neighbours, both residing at the Northern Bear Golf Course. Mr. Makowecki began residing at Northern Bear in about 2014 and Mr. Ellis and his wife Jennifer began living there in or about 2015. Mr. Ellis and Mr. Makowecki also developed a close friendship and spent time golfing, socializing, fishing, and going to hockey games.

















 iv.



Darcy Deleeuw
 

 Mr. Deleeuw is a businessperson who has owned and operated Road Gear Sportswear Ltd. for the last 30 years. He also lived at the Northern Bear Golf Course and was a neighbour of both Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Ellis. Mr. Deleeuw also developed a friendship with Mr. Ellis that involved golfing, fishing, and socializing.


















v.



Kent Halliday
 

 Mr. Halliday was the director of marketing for ZCL Composites in Edmonton. In March or April 2017, he was introduced to Mr. Ellis through two of his golf partners, Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Deleeuw. Mr. Halliday and Mr. Ellis also became friends. 

















 vi.



Stewart Lee
 

 Mr. Lee worked for Steelcraft Door Products Ltd (Steelcraft) and its subsidiary, Barcol. He was an 11-year employee and occupied the position of human resources manager. Mr. Lee met Mr. Ellis when Mr. Ellis was hired in September 2017 as the General Manager of Barcol. Mr. Lee’s relationship with Mr. Ellis was that of a co-worker.
















 vii.



Robert Hawman 
 

 Mr. Hawman had a career in the military which he left in 2017. Mr. Lee had been one of his former colleagues in the military and encouraged Mr. Hawman to consider Barcol as an employment opportunity. This led to a meeting with Mr. Ellis and resulted in Mr. Hawman joining Barcol in November 2017. Like Mr. Lee, Mr. Hawman’s relationship with Mr. Ellis was purely as a co-worker.
















viii.



Dusan Nikicevic
 

 Mr. Nikicevic was a very long serving employee of Steelcraft, having started his career with that company after receiving an accounting diploma from NAIT in 1983. By 2017 he had been transferred to Barcol as the Controller and for a time was the interim General Manager of Barcol. When Mr. Ellis joined Barcol in September 2017 as General Manager, Mr. Nikicevic began reporting to him. Mr. Nikicevic’s relationship with Mr. Ellis was that of a co-worker who reported to Mr. Ellis.
b)
 The Investment Contributions
 

 Each of the investors contributed substantial amounts to the projects that were promoted by Mr. Ellis. The earliest and largest of the projects, in terms of the amount invested was the Dynasty Project in which Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki invested a total of more than $1.189 million. 
 

 The Reebok Jersey Program was the second in time of the investment opportunities and was also the second largest of the investments. Six of the investors participated in the Reebok Jersey Program. A total of more than $319,000 was invested in this program by these investors. 
 

 The remaining investment opportunities came later in time and involved investments by only one investor each. For example, Mr. Nikicevic was the only investor in the Bridge Financing Project. Mr. Halliday was the only investor in the Barcol Acquisition project and Mr. Makowecki was the only investor in the Telus and Gretzky projects. With one small exception, all of the funds invested were lost.
 

 A summary of the amounts invested is as follows:
 




 Dynasty
Project 
 Reebok Jersey Program 
 Bridge Financing 
 Barcol Acquisition 
 Telus/ Gretzky 
Total 


 Blackburn 
193,735 




193,735 


 McLean 
399,102 
 
 145,210 



544,312 


 Makowecki 
596,409 
 

 45,625 


 125,274 
767,308 


 Deleeuw 

 

39,375* 



39,375* 


 Halliday 

 

 39,375 

49,475 

 
 88,850 


 Lee 

 

 25,000 



 
 25,000 


 Hawman 

 

 25,000 



 
 25,000 


 Nikicevic 


40,250 


 
 40,250 


 Total 
 1,189,246 
 

319,585 
40,250 
 
49,475 
 125,274 
 1,723,830 











*Mr. Deleeuw received a return of $21,165 from Mr. Ellis in May 2018
 IV.



The Evidence of Mr. Ellis
 

 Mr. Ellis is an intelligent and well-educated man. He has a university education, including an Executive MBA from Queen’s University. Mr. Ellis is also an experienced business leader with a history of involvement in mergers and acquisitions, although as he explained, most major business transactions in the modern era involve acquisitions rather than mergers. His experience included participating in a 2009 acquisition that had a value of approximately $1 billion. 
 

 Mr. Ellis was highly regarded by those he worked with, including some of the Complainants. For example, Mr. Blackburn worked with Mr. Ellis at Wainbee and described him as a high energy person with many good business ideas. He was impressed by the work that Mr. Ellis had done for Wainbee. 
 

 Mr. Ellis acknowledges having received more than $1.7 million from the Complainants in relation to investment opportunities. Mr. Ellis testified that on receipt of those monies “... I gave it to the people that it needed to go to”, meaning that he did not improperly keep the funds for his personal use.
 

 Mr. Ellis acknowledges that most of the investors have not received a return of their investment funds. However, Mr. Ellis denies knowingly participating in any fraudulent activity.
a)

The Dynasty Project
 

 Mr. Ellis testified that he was approached by a software developer by the name of “Dean” who was attempting to raise “seed money” for the further development and sale of an “app” technology which was to be licenced. The technology involved a mechanism to communicate via a subscription service with athletes before and after games. These chats or streams were intended to provide the customer with a more in-depth understanding of the athlete at different times. The plan for the technology included a partnership with sports leagues. 
 

 Mr. Ellis testified that he met “Dean” in the following manner:
I met him through associates of my ex-wife who was in the computer world --- nothing like that. She didn’t design anything. She was actually an IT person that fixed computers. A friend of a friend of hers – and she told me that maybe I should talk to this person. So I went into Sherwood Park and met this person at Starbucks on Wye Road. And they sort of explained it to me. There was someone else with him that day which I never met again. And he kind of rolled it out to me and explained to me. Showed me a lot of stuff on a computer screen that didn’t completely make sense to me but I was understanding what they were telling me and where they wanted to go and what they wanted to be.
 

 Mr. Ellis testified that he could not remember “Dean’s” last name. Mr. Ellis did not testify as to when the Starbucks meeting took place.
 

 Mr. Ellis testified that after his meeting with “Dean”, he was contacted by Tom and Frank Tiebert. The Tieberts represented themselves to be lawyers from Ontario who were acting on behalf of the Dynasty Project. Their work included attempts to get “sign off” from the leagues. Mr. Ellis’ first contact with the Tieberts was via email, following which Mr. Ellis had many phone calls and emails from the Tieberts. In addition, he and Mr. McLean met in person with Tom Tiebert in Edmonton at a Starbucks Restaurant for a short visit. Mr. Ellis testified that he has never met Frank Tiebert.
 

 Mr. Ellis acknowledged receiving from each of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki substantial funds for investment in the Dynasty project. The plan was that each of the investors would receive very large returns (millions or billions of dollars) on the closing of the sale of the technology to Microsoft. The closing was originally contemplated to take place within a short timeframe after the investments were made, but the closing was delayed on numerous occasions for the reasons given in emails from the Tieberts which Mr. Ellis passed on to the investors. At various times the Tiebert emails represented that some or all of the funds for closing were in a trust account. 
 

 Mr. Ellis testified that there were several variations of the “app” that were being developed by the computer programmers, thus giving rise to three “different versions” of the technology. He explained that they were “separate and different”. He testified that Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki each invested in different variations of the app.
 

 Mr. Ellis denied that he sold the very same interest in the technology three different times to Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki, as suggested by the Crown. He testified:
Q. 

 Okay. And you never thought to disclose to the other complainants involved in different versions of the Dynasty Group that actually you had three versions of the Dynasty Group Partnership?
A.

 I don’t know that it would be any of their business.
Q. 

 Well, don’t you think that it would be confusing in terms of what they understood that they owned?
A.

 No. They knew what they owned. They knew that they owned that piece that was that property.
Q.

 I am going to suggest to you that that’s nonsense, that’s just a fiction.
A.

 I disagree with you 100%.
 

 Mr. Ellis testified that all his information regarding the Dynasty Project came from “Dean” and from the Tieberts. He testified that he was just as frustrated as Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki that the project did not progress on the timeline originally anticipated. He also shared their frustrations when meetings were delayed or cancelled. However, he continued to have confidence in the legitimacy of the project.
 

 Banking records from his accounts at the Royal Bank of Canada (RBC) have been admitted by Mr. Ellis. Specifically with respect to the Dynasty Project the banking records show that almost $1.2 million was deposited into Mr. Ellis’s RBC accounts by Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki.
 

 The Dynasty Project began in approximately February 2016. Mr. Ellis testified that the project continued until approximately March 2019 when Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki just “stopped talking” to Mr. Ellis. This was at the time when the investors made complaints to police and the fraud investigation began. The closing of the Dynasty Project had not taken place by that time. Nor did the closing ever take place.


















 i.



Tieberts Request Investor Contributions
 

 During the first two and one half years of the project, many emails were sent by the Tieberts to Mr. Ellis asking for additional funds for various purposes in relation to the Dynasty Project. Those emails were passed on by Mr. Ellis and funds were then provided by the investors to Mr. Ellis who then deposited the funds into one of his accounts at RBC. Mr. Ellis testified that he received these monies but then passed the funds on to the Tieberts as he was required to do. 
 

 The Crown submits that the Tieberts were not real persons, and that Mr. Ellis was responsible for creating the Tiebert email account. The Crown also submits that Mr. Ellis was responsible for creating the email messages which he sent purporting to be the Tieberts, all as part of a fraudulent scheme to extract substantial additional contributions from the investors in the Dynasty Project.
 

 When testifying, Mr. Ellis forcefully denied that he created the Tiebert email account, and he also forcefully denied that he was the author of any of the Tiebert emails. 
 

 Mr. Ellis testified that he did not send any emails holding himself out to be Tom Tiebert.
 

 Mr. Ellis testified that he did not send any emails holding himself out to be Frank Tiebert.
 

 Mr. Ellis testified that he has no knowledge of whether his wife or any other person used his cell phone or any other device to send or receive email messages that might be relevant to this case.


















ii.



The Scotiabank Account
 

 The Crown submitted that Mr. Ellis received large amounts of money from the investors in the Dynasty project, but that Mr. Ellis did not properly deal with those funds by passing them on to the Tieberts or other persons who were to be the proper recipients. 
 

 In partial response to those assertions, Mr. Ellis testified that in or about early 2017, he opened and maintained a bank account at Scotiabank (the “Scotiabank Account”). Mr. Ellis testified that the Scotiabank Account held significant funds at times and that he used the Scotiabank Account for processing payments with respect to some of the investments that are the subject of this litigation. 
 

 Mr. Ellis testified that he couldn’t be sure but he “wanted to say” that he paid the Tieberts from this account. He testified that he also paid the Tieberts funds in unconventional ways including cash drops, transfers of securities, the use of payday loans and by paying inflated purchase prices at a coin and stamp business in West Edmonton Mall (presumably with the excess funds being passed on by the merchant to the Tieberts).
 

 The Crown tendered extensive banking records from RBC, Scotiabank and credit card companies that been obtained by a Production Order. In response to the Production Order, Scotiabank responded with affidavits disclosing the records that they held in relation to Mr. Ellis. These records did not disclose any bank account as described by Mr. Ellis. 
 

 The Crown submits that the Scotiabank Account did not exist.
 

 Mr. Ellis insisted that the Scotiabank Account was real and that he used the account in relation to the investments that are the subject of the present charges.

















 iii.



Mike Bossy and the Dynasty Project
 

 Mike Bossy was a retired professional hockey player who passed away in the Spring of 2022. Prior to his death, Mr. Bossy made several paid personal appearances at events organized by Mr. Ellis including a “Fins and Skins” golf and fishing event, a Barcol golf tournament in the summer of 2018 and an Edmonton Oilers hockey game. Mr. Bossy was introduced to each of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki at one or more of these events. 
 

Mr. Ellis testified that Mr. Bossy was never involved in any way with the Dynasty project. An Agreed Statement of Facts confirms, among other things that “Bossy has never been involved in the ‘Dynasty Project’ or any form of software or social media development, either with the Accused or with any other person”. 
 

 Despite Mr. Bossy not being involved in the Dynasty Project, each of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki received communications from an email address, bossym573@*****. The person sending the email messages represented that he or she was Mike Bossy and provided input regarding the Dynasty Project. 
 

 The Agreed Statement of Facts makes it clear that Mike Bossy did not know of and had never used the bossym573@***** email account. As a result, messages from this email account from a person pretending to be Mr. Bossy were not actually from Mr. Bossy and in this way the messages were dishonest and deceitful.
 

 The Crown argues that the fake Bossy email account was fraudulently created and used by Mr. Ellis to further manipulate the investors and entice them to make ongoing investments into the Dynasty Project.
 

 Mr. Ellis testified that he did not create the fake Bossy email account. 
 

 Mr. Ellis testified that he did not use the fake Bossy email account to send messages to any of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean or Mr. Makowecki.

















 iv.



Bruce Geiger – Miller Thomson
 

 Bruce Geiger is a lawyer practicing in the Edmonton office of the law firm of Miller Thomson LLP. Neither Mr. Geiger nor Miller Thomson LLP had any involvement with Mr. Ellis or with the Tieberts or with any of the events that give rise to the criminal charges against Mr. Ellis.
 

 Mr. Ellis testified that he first became aware of Miller Thomson and Mr. Geiger sometime in late April 2018. 
 

 Mr. Makowecki testified that he received an email from Mr. Ellis dated May 1, 2018. This email forwarded an email from Frank Tiebert dated May 1, 2018 which, in turn, attached a letter from Miller Thomson dated April 30, 2018 purportedly signed by Mr. Geiger. The Miller Thomson letter confirmed that $33,015,513.86 was being held in an interest-bearing trust account for the benefit of B&G Group Ltd and Makow Properties Ltd (Mr. Makowecki’s holding company). 
 

 The B&G Group referred to in the Miller Thomson letter is not a corporate entity. Instead, it is a trade name that Mr. Ellis registered with the Alberta Corporate Registry on March 22, 2017. After registering B&G as a trade name, Mr. Ellis opened a bank account in the name of B&G Group at RBC on or about March 28, 2017. In the RBC account opening documentation, Mr. Ellis represented that B&G Group was a sole proprietorship and that he owned a 100% interest in the proprietorship. 
 

 It is admitted that the Miller Thomson letter is a forgery. 
 

 There is an inconsistency in Mr. Ellis’s evidence as to whether he received the May 1, 2018 Tiebert email or the April 30, 2018 forged Miller Thomson letter. Nevertheless Mr. Ellis was consistent in denying responsibility for the Miller Thomson letter.
 

 Mr. Ellis denied that he was the author of the Tiebert email dated May 1, 2018.
 

 Mr. Ellis denied that he was the author of the forged Miller Thomson letter dated April 30, 2018.
 

 Mr. Ellis denied that he was responsible for the signature of Mr. Geiger on the forged Miller Thomson letter.


















v.



“RCMP Officer” Paul Desjardins
 

 Mr. Makowecki testified that after learning in mid September 2018 that the Miller Thomson letter was a forgery, he met with Mr. Ellis to apply some pressure and to discuss concerns with the Dynasty Project. According to Mr. Makowecki, Mr. Ellis disclosed that his brother and a banker had been engaged in some type of fraudulent activity in relation to the Dynasty Project, the RCMP were investigating, and arrest warrants were being executed. According to Mr. Makowecki, Mr. Ellis told him that a RCMP member by the name of Paul Desjardins would be contacting him in relation to the investigation.
 

 Over the next six weeks Mr. Makowecki had several text communications with a person holding himself out to be an investigator by the name of Paul Desjardins and that several meetings were scheduled, including meetings at a restaurant in Mexico where Mr. Makowecki was holidaying. None of the meetings took place. 
 

 It is admitted that Paul Desjardins is not a member of the RCMP and that the RCMP were never investigating Mr. Ellis’ brother or a banker in relation to fraud allegations.
 

 Mr. Ellis testified that he had never seen the text messages between Mr. Makowecki and Paul Desjardins.
 

 Mr. Ellis testified that he did not write any of the text messages that purported to come from Paul Desjardins.
 

 Mr. Ellis testified that he is not associated with the telephone number used by Paul Desjardins to have text communications with Mr. Makowecki.
 

 Mr. Ellis testified that he has never held himself out to be Paul Desjardins.
b)
 The Reebok Jersey Program
 

 It is admitted by the Crown and the Defence that beginning in the 2017-18 NHL season (which commenced in October 2017), the league switched from Reebok-branded team jerseys to Adidas-branded team jerseys. As a result, any remaining stocks of Reebok-branded NHL team jerseys would not be considered current.
 

 Mr. Ellis testified that the Reebok Jersey Program involved the purchase of some of the Reebok team jerseys, having the jerseys framed and then reselling the jerseys for a profit.
 

 Mr. Ellis testified that project began when he was in contact with a person named “Jack” through the “collecting world”. He did not know “Jack’s last name, but Mr. Ellis had seen “Jack” at a few events. Mr. Ellis did not explain the month or the year in which this contact took place.
 
 Mr. Ellis testified that “Jack” had some connections with Upper Deck, a sports memorabilia distributor in the United States. Mr. Ellis described the development of the Reebok Jersey Project as follows:
... he [Jack] had given me a couple of Upper Deck jerseys that I took away. And then that’s how that was formatted. And that kind of exploded – it was sort of three different entities; jerseys from Canadian teams, game used jerseys, and then there was some potential of some equipment as well as jerseys.
 
 At some time following their first contact, “Jack” provided Mr. Ellis with a four-page schedule listing over 1,000 jerseys (both home and away jerseys of over 150 NHL players) that would be available for use in the Reebok Jersey Program. The list also included other hockey equipment that would be available.
 
 Mr. Ellis testified that Mr. Wei Wong became involved in the Reebok Jersey Program. Mr. Wong operated a business in Edmonton, Vestate Canada Inc (Vestate), which, among other things, framed sports jerseys and other sports memorabilia. Mr. Ellis testified that Mr. Wong’s involvement in the Reebok Jersey Program was for the purpose of framing jerseys prior to their sale to the ultimate customer. Mr. Ellis arranged for each of the investors in the Reebok Jersey Program to tour the Vestate manufacturing facility. All agreed that the facility was impressive.
 
 Mr. Ellis testified that he had used Mr. Wong’s services in the past to very good success and that the quality of Mr. Wong’s work was better than anything that he had ever seen. Mr. Ellis testified that he spoke to Mr. Wong regarding the Reebok Jersey Program. As explained by Mr. Ellis:
We had discussed very briefly one time on his ability to handle a significant number of jerseys and it was a non-issue. He said just bring them and let me do them.
 
 Mr. Ellis testified that from 2016 to 2018 or 2019, Mr. Wong framed between 80 and 100 jerseys for him. Later he estimated that in total for all the projects, more than 100 and less than 150 jerseys were framed by Mr. Wong.
 
 In cross-examination the Crown suggested that the Jersey Project was a fiction. Mr. Ellis emphatically disagreed.
 
 Also in cross-examination, the Crown suggested that Mr. Ellis had sold the very same interest in the jersey project three times to different investors or groups of investors. Once again Mr. Ellis emphatically disagreed.
b)
 The Bridge Financing Project
 
 The Bridge Financing Project began in late 2017. Mr. Nikicevic invested two amounts in the project, $24,500 on November 1, 2017, and $15,750 on December 5, 2017. Both amounts were deposited into Mr. Ellis’ B&G account at RBC.
 
 Mr. Ellis described his involvement with the project by saying “there were a group of guys” that he knew from the golf course. The plan was described by Mr. Ellis in the following way:
We – so there was a group of them and then Dusan [Mr. Nikicevic] invested into me because that’s what I was explained by one of the other guys is that he had people invest in him. I believe it was his brother-in-law. And then they would give all the money to the guy buying the property. And then his brother, I believe, was the real estate agent. An then we would bridge the financing in between two buildings or three buildings.
 
 Mr. Ellis testified that the investment group in relation to the Bridge Financing Project “had nothing to do with hockey players”. Specifically, Mr. Ellis testified that Kevin Lowe and Craig MacTavish were not involved.
 
 Mr. Ellis was not able to identify the persons in the group who were participating in the Bridge Financing Project. In cross-examination he testified as follows:
Q.

 Okay. And in terms of bridge financing at some point the different investors’ funds need to come together at some point, right, for the actual financing to work. So who ultimately was in control of the financing project in which Mr. Nikicevic was brought in?
A.

 One of the other guys.
Q.

 What’s his name?
A.

 A bunch of guys I should have never gotten involved with. His name was Brad.
Q.

 Brad?
A.

 I don’t know.
Q.

 It wouldn’t be Brad Sevryn (phonetic) the accountant?
A.

 No. No.
Q.

 And how did you –
A. 

 Brent. Brent, not Brad. Brent.
Q.

 And how did you pay Brent?
A.

 Cash that’s how I got involved with these buys in the first place.
 
 Mr. Ellis testified that at some point after Mr. Nikicevic made his investments, he reported to Mr. Nikicevic that the project had been profitable and that Mr. Nikicevic’s share of the profit was $75,000. However, Mr. Ellis also told Mr. Nikicevic that he had reinvested the funds.
 
 Mr. Ellis testified that Mr. Nikicevic has been repaid his investment in the Bridge Financing Project. He explained that the repayment was made by giving Mr. Nikicevic access to a townhouse in Arizona for a few days during a soccer tournament. Mr. Ellis also said that Mr. Nikicevic was paid by the delivery of some cash, although he did not specify the amount. Finally, Mr. Ellis testified that on his arrest he was in possession of $21,455 that was seized by police and subject to civil forfeiture. Mr. Ellis attributes this as a repayment to Mr. Nikicevic. 
 
 The Crown submits that the Bridge Financing Project was a sham that never existed.
 
 Mr. Ellis denies that this is the case.
d)
 The Barcol Acquisition Project
 
 Mr. Ellis began his employment as the General Manager of Barcol in September 2017. Several months later he was promoted to the Chief Operating Officer of Steelcraft. In those positions he became familiar with the affairs of Barcol and Steelcraft. In Mr. Ellis’ view, Barcol required some structural changes to make it more efficient. In particular, he observed that there was a problem with the whole relationship between Steelcraft as the parent company, and Barcol the subsidiary. The identified problem was that Barcol could only sell Steelcraft products and was therefore “beholden to Steelcraft”. For this reason, and given his background in acquisitions, Mr. Ellis felt that Barcol was an acquisition target.
 
 Mr. Ellis testified that he began discussions with the owner of Barcol and Steelcraft, Kim Mihalcheon. He testified that he asked Ms. Mihalcheon whether she was interested in selling Barcol. Her response was that “anything is for sale”. Mr. Ellis further elaborated on Ms. Mihalcheon’s willingness to sell by testifying:
... I guess a bit of a joke in that world that when you ask someone if they are for sale, there are only two answers. Number 1 is yes and the other one is absolutely not but if I was, how much do you think its worth? And that is where we were with Kim [Ms. Mihalcheon].
 
 Mr. Ellis emphasised that Ms. Mihalcheon did not have an emotional attachment to Barcol because it wasn’t in the family. He explained that Ms. Mihalcheon’s father had originally been a small shareholder in Barcol and later acquired the interests of the other shareholders until he owned the entire company.
 
 Based on this Mr. Ellis testified that he initiated a process for a potential acquisition of Barcol. He began by separately approaching Mr. Makowecki and then Mr. Deleeuw in or about mid to late 2018. He explained to them that Ms. Mihalcheon was seriously ill with cancer and wanted to sell Barcol. Both Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Deleeuw were interested in participating in the venture but ultimately neither went further with the investment opportunity.
 
 Mr. Ellis testified that he also approached Mr. Halliday regarding the purchase of Barcol. As was the case with Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Deleeuw, Mr. Ellis explained that Ms. Mihalcheon was seriously ill and for this reason was a motivated seller. Mr. Halliday’s interest in Barcol was greater than simply as an investor because, in or about September 2018, he resigned from his employment with ZCL Composites and was very interested in working with Mr. Ellis and becoming a senior member of the Barcol management team. 
 
 Mr. Ellis and Mr. Halliday entered into an agreement in writing dated January 24, 2019 by the terms of which Mr. Halliday purchased a 50% interest in “B&G Group Ltd” for a payment of $25,000 from Mr. Halliday to Mr. Ellis. The agreement also provided that:
B&G Group Ltd. is in the process of acquiring 93.75% ownership of Barcol Door Ltd. and an additional stake in Steelcraft Door Ltd of 23.5%. Ellis and Halliday will be partners in this venture.
 
 Mr. Halliday made a second investment in the Barcol acquisition project on March 8, 2019. The amount of the investment was $24,475. 
 
 The Crown submits that the Barcol Acquisition project was not real but was simply a scheme to enrich Mr. Ellis at the expense of Mr. Halliday.
 
 Mr. Ellis denies any fraudulent activity in relation to the Barcol Acquisition.
e)

Other Investment Opportunities
 
 In 2018, Mr. Ellis sought and secured additional funds from Mr. Makowecki in relation to two other projects. The first was related to software development for Telus for which Mr. Makowecki paid Mr. Ellis $30,375. The second entailed limited merchandise related to Wayne Gretzky. Mr. Makowecki paid a total of $94,899 to participate in the Gretzky opportunity.
 
 The Crown submits that both projects were shams designed to enrich Mr. Ellis at Mr. Makowecki’s expense.
 
 Mr. Ellis denied any wrongdoing in relation to these projects. 

 V.



Assessment of Evidence of Mr. Ellis
 
 It is first necessary for me to assess Mr. Ellis’ credibility. I must determine whether I believe his evidence and thus whether he should be acquitted on that basis.
 
 The thrust of Mr. Ellis’ evidence is that all of the investment projects were legitimate business opportunities and that all the funds he received from the investors were passed on to those who were properly entitled to receive them. He denies that he sold the same interest in the Dynasty Project or the Reebok Jersey Program to different sets of investors. He denies any dishonesty or fraud in relation to the investment opportunities.
 
 I do not believe Mr. Ellis.
 
 I do not find Mr. Ellis to be a truthful or a credible witness.
 
 Mr. Ellis gave evidence that is demonstrably false on material issues. His evidence was inconsistent with facts admitted in the Agreed Statement of Facts, is internally inconsistent and, in many respects, his evidence defied reason and common sense. 
 
 I will describe some of the examples of Mr. Ellis’ lack of credibility.
 
 Mr. Ellis testified that the Reebok Jersey program was sold to three groups of investors and that each of the three groups purchased a different “piece”. That evidence is demonstrably false. The falsehood is made clear by a comparison of two of the Joint Venture Agreements signed by the parties. That comparison establishes that the Joint Venture Agreement signed by Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Deleeuw in November 2017 (later to include Mr. Halliday) and the Joint Venture Agreement signed by Mr. Lee and Mr. Hawman in April 2018 both contain identical language to describe the scope of the joint venture:
 


 Clause 2 


The business name of the Venture will be Reebok Jersey Program
Clause 3


 The exclusive purpose of the Venture will be the NHL Jersey and Equipment Purchase and Resale.
Clause 4


 This venture will begin starting ... and continue in full force and effect (the “Term”) until the occurrence of the following event:
o
As agreed upon, all jerseys that are wanted have been purchased based upon first right of refusal.
Clause 7


 The Members have appointed Nick Ellis to act as manager (the “Manager”) for the Venture








(emphasis added)
 
 The scope of these agreements is identical. There is no room to suggest that these two groups of investors were purchasing different “pieces” of the Reebok Jersey Program. Mr. Ellis lacks credibility when he suggests otherwise.
 
 Moreover, the Joint Venture Agreements of November 2017 and April 2018 were executed long after Mr. McLean had invested in the Reebok Jersey Program in September 2017. Mr. Ellis did not testify that he imposed restrictions on the scope of the agreement with Mr. McLean. After having sold the Reebok Jersey Program to Mr. McLean there was nothing left to sell to the two groups of joint venturers in November 2017 and April 2018.
 
 Mr. Ellis explained that Mr. McLean moved from the original Reebok Jersey Program to the Upper Deck “piece”. This explanation potentially has some support because Mr. McLean’s name appeared as a party to the November 2017 Joint Venture Agreement but was seemingly removed from the agreement when Mr. Halliday purchased Mr. McLean’s interest in the Joint Venture Agreement in February 2018. This is potentially consistent with Mr. Ellis’ evidence that Mr. McLean was moving to the Upper Deck “piece”. However, Mr. Ellis’s evidence in this regard cannot be assessed in isolation but instead needs to be considered in the context of the other evidence, including the evidence of Mr. McLean that he never signed the Joint Venture Agreement, that his signature on the agreement is a forgery and that he was never in a joint venture with Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Deleeuw as described in the November 2017 Joint Venture Agreement. When viewed in context, Mr. Ellis is not believable when he said that Mr. McLean’s September 2017 investment in the Reebok Jersey Program somehow transitioned into the Upper Deck “piece”. In any event, as I will describe later, the Upper Deck “piece” was fictional.
 
 I conclude that Mr. Ellis was not being candid when he testified that each of the three groups of investors were sold different “pieces” of the Reebok Jersey Program. 
 
 Similarly, Mr. Ellis was not being candid when he repeatedly testified that each of the three Dynasty Project investors had purchased different “pieces” of that project. When Mr. McLean first invested in the Dynasty Project in March 2016, a guarantee was given by Mr. Ellis in relation to Mr. McLean’s investment. The guarantee disclosed that Mr. McLean was purchasing 40% of Mr. Ellis’ interest in the Dynasty Group. The guarantee includes these additional handwritten words:
Terry will own 40% of all Holdings Involved Including Intellectual Property – Dynasty Group, Dynasty 79 Group and any Holdings owed by Nick Ellis.
 
 Mr. Ellis testified that these words were added to the guarantee to ensure that Mr. McLean would be “included in everything”. Mr. Ellis testified:
It was actually Terry who said we should do something like this. He had been on a couple of opportunities where they had invested in some very specific technology and then other things branched out. And then he was told oh, the piece that you were in was only small. Everything else made money. So he wanted to ensure that he would be included in everything.
 
 Having agreed to provide a guarantee on terms that were intended to make it clear that Mr. McLean was “included in everything”, Mr. Ellis’s testimony that Mr. McLean had only purchased one of three “pieces” of the Dynasty Project is simply not believable. 
 
 Moreover, Mr. Ellis acknowledged in cross-examination that the evolution of the Dynasty Project into three pieces did not take place until at or around the time that Mr. Makowecki invested in the Dynasty Project. That was more than six months after both Mr. Blackburn and Mr. McLean invested in the Dynasty Project in February 2016 and March 2016 respectively. Thus, even if Mr. Ellis’s evidence on the evolution of the Dynasty Project is true, the transition into three “pieces” did not take place until after he had sold the same interest in project to both Mr. Blackburn and Mr. McLean.
 
 I do not believe Mr. Ellis when he testified that he sold separate “pieces” of the Dynasty Project to the three investors.
 
 Mr. Ellis was also inconsistent in his evidence on material points. For example, in his direct evidence he testified that he was aware that a letter dated April 30, 2018 from the law firm of Miller Thomson had been given to Mr. Makowecki. That letter certified that the law firm was holding more that $33 million in trust for the benefit of B&G and Makow Properties Ltd (Mr. Makowecki’s holding company). By an Agreed Statement of Facts, it is admitted that the Miller Thomson letter was a forgery. However, in cross-examination, Mr. Ellis denied knowing anything about the letter. This was directly inconsistent with his examination-in-chief on a material point. Mr. Ellis lacks credibility when he asserts a lack of knowledge regarding the forged Miller Thomson letter.
 
 The involvement of Mike Bossy as an investor in the Dynasty Project was also a material issue on which Mr. Ellis was inconsistent. Mr. Ellis repeatedly testified that Mike Bossy was not involved in the Dynasty Project. This is confirmed in the Agreed Statement of Facts. Despite these admissions, Mr. Ellis testified that he received an email from Frank Tiebert dated July 13, 2017 which he passed on to Mr. Makowecki. The Tiebert email specifically refers to Mr. Bossy as having a 10% interest in the project and that Mr. Ellis and Mr. Makowecki each had a 45% interest. The inconsistency between the admitted facts and what Mr. Ellis led Mr. Makowecki to believe in 2017 regarding Mr. Bossy’s involvement undermines Mr. Ellis’ credibility.
 
 Mr. Ellis was cross-examined regarding the disposition of the funds he received from Mr. Nikicevic in relation to the Bridge Financing Project. He testified that the funds were paid to Frank and Tom Tiebert. However, there was no evidence that the Tieberts were involved in any of the investments other than the Dynasty Project and the Telus Project. Moreover, Mr. Ellis also testified that Mr. Nikicevic’s investment in the Bridge Financing Project represented a purchase of a portion of Mr. Ellis’ interest in the project which, if true, would suggest that he was entitled to keep the proceeds of that sale and not pass them on to the Tieberts or anyone else. Mr. Ellis’s evidence regarding this investment was circular and not credible.
 
 Mr. Ellis was cross-examined on the statement he provided to police following his arrest. He testified that prior to police proceeding with the interview he had not been cautioned by police regarding his right to remain silent. However, the recording from the interview clearly demonstrates that the proper caution was given.
 
 During the police interview Mr. Ellis was asked what had happened to the $1.8 million he had received by the investors. Mr. Ellis responded by saying that he had never had the money. The banking records and Mr. Ellis’ own evidence proves that this was false. 
 
 Mr. Ellis testified that a $120,000 payment was to be made to the Edmonton Oilers in connection with the Reebok Jersey Program. He explained that this was to be “our first big purchase through the Oilers”. Mr. Ellis showed Mr. McLean the cheque of B&G Group dated October 5, 2017 in the amount of $120,000 payable to “Edmonton Oilers Hockey Club”. This led Mr. McLean to believe that $120,000 was being paid to the Oilers. However, the cheque was never given to the Oilers and certainly was not negotiated. Mr. Ellis’s evidence in relation to a $120,000 payment to the Oilers is in direct conflict with the Agreed Statement of Facts which proves that the Oilers have never had any discussions with or been involved with Mr. Ellis or B&G in any investment or business including the bulk sales of team jerseys or equipment. Mr. Ellis is lacking in credibility when he testified that $120,000 was to be paid to the Oilers for jerseys. 
 
 Mr. Ellis had a meeting with Mr. Makowecki on January 14, 2019. During that meeting Mr. Ellis represented that Mr. Deleeuw was no longer part of the Reebok Jersey Program and that he had been paid $60,000 in relation to the investment. If true, this would have meant that Mr. Deleeuw received a 50% profit on his investment. Mr. Ellis’ representation was not true. Mr. Deleeuw was paid $21,156 in May 2018. This resulted in Mr. Deleeuw’s loss being reduced from $39,375 to $18,219. 
 
 Mr. Ellis is also lacking in credibility when he testified that after receiving the investment monies from the investors “... I gave it to the people that it needed to go to”. The banking records are admitted by Mr. Ellis. The records demonstrate that 100% of the $1.7 million invested by the Complainants were deposited into one of four accounts at RBC: a joint account with his wife (account ending ... 9249), a savings account (account ending ...0438), a second savings account (account ending ...7905) and a B&G account (account ending ... 0677). The banking records show no evidence that funds were passed on to anyone who was intended to be the ultimate legitimate recipient. To the contrary the banking records show that the funds received from investors were primarily used to paydown Mr. Ellis’ lines of credit, loan payments and personal credit card balances. 
 
 I conclude that I cannot believe the evidence of Mr. Ellis and, as a result, I cannot acquit at the first stage of W(D).
 
 Even though I do not believe the evidence of Mr. Ellis, I still need to consider whether his evidence denying guilt leaves me with a reasonable doubt.
 
 One of the grounds on which the Crown submits that fraud has been established is that none of the investment schemes were real and that they were all shams. Mr. Ellis denied that this was the case. He emphasized that the investment programs were legitimate. In assessing whether this assertion creates a reasonable doubt, I need to consider the totality of his evidence. 
 
 When describing the investment programs, Mr. Ellis was not able to identify the actual name of any of the persons he was dealing with. For example:
•


In relation to the Dynasty Project, Mr. Ellis testified that he met with “Dean” though a friend of a friend of his wife. The meeting took place at a Starbuck’s restaurant. He did not know “Dean’s” last name.
•


In relation to the Reebok Jersey Program, Mr. Ellis testified that he was in contact with a person named “Jack” who was a person he had met in the “collecting world”. Mr. Ellis testified that did not know “Jack’s” last name, but that he had seen “Jack” at a few events. 
•


Also in relation to the Reebok Jersey Program, Mr. Ellis testified that he was contacted by “someone” with the Edmonton Oilers and made arrangements to purchase an inventory of jerseys in exchange for $15,000. Mr. Ellis testified that he paid the amount in cash to “Richard” but that he did not receive a receipt for the money, nor did he receive all of the jerseys he was entitled to. Mr. Ellis did not know “Richard’s” last name.
•


In relation to the Bridge Financing Project, Mr. Ellis testified that he became involved in the project with “a bunch of guys” from the golf course. He thought the name of his contact was “Brad” but then later said it was “Brent”. There was no indication that he knew “Brent’s” last name.
 
 Mr. Ellis did not have any obligation to testify. Nor does he have any onus or obligation to prove that the investment programs were real or legitimate. However, because he testified, his credibility must be assessed for the purpose of determining whether his evidence gives rise to reasonable doubt. Reasonable doubt must be based on reason and common sense that is logically connected to the evidence, or the absence of evidence. The evidence given by Mr. Ellis regarding the persons he had direct contact with in relation to these investments is grossly suspect. There is no reason or common sense to his suggestion that he was involved in investment projects worth of millions of dollars without knowing the surnames of the persons he was dealing with. This evidence has no ring of truth. It does not give rise to reasonable doubt.
 
 A substantial portion of the investment funds were payable to the Tieberts to satisfy the request for funds to pay expenses in relation to the Dynasty Project. Yet the banking records do not disclose any payment to the Tieberts in any amount during the relevant period. Mr. Ellis testified that he couldn’t be sure but he “wanted to say” that he paid the Tieberts from Scotiabank Account he had opened in or about January 2017. However, 100% of the $1.2 million contributed by the Dynasty Project investors was deposited into Mr. Ellis’ accounts at RBC. The RBC banking records do not show any transfers of any of the $1.2 million to the Scotiabank savings account. Reasonable doubt does not arise in relation to Mr. Ellis’ evidence that he paid the Tieberts monies from the Scotiabank Account.
 
 Mr. Ellis testified that some of the payments to the Tieberts and others were made through unconventional means. For example, he testified to making cash drops, transferring securities from an RBC investment account, paying inflated prices for merchandise at a coin and stamp business at West Edmonton Mall with the difference being passed on to the person to whom Mr. Ellis was to be paying. These types of payments do not give rise to reasonable doubt because they defy reason and common sense. This is simply not believable and does not give rise to reasonable doubt. Moreover, RBC responded to the Production Order and disclosed a large number of bank accounts, loan accounts, lines of credit, Visa accounts and Mastercard accounts, but there is no reference to the existence of any RBC investment account associated with Mr. Ellis.
 
 Mr. Ellis made bare denials in relation to his involvement with false email accounts and a forged letter from a law firm. These denials cannot be assessed in isolation and must be considered in the context of the whole of the evidence, which I will review later in these reasons. After conducting that review, I conclude that the bare denials do not give rise to reasonable doubt.
 
 When determining whether reasonable doubt exists, I must also consider other potentially exculpatory evidence. Mr. Makowecki testified that in late 2018 he was told by Mr. Ellis that a banker and Mr. Ellis’s brother were involved in a fraud that in some way related to the Dynasty Project investments. Mr. Ellis told Mr. Makowecki that the RCMP were investigating and that arrest warrants were being executed. According to Mr. Makowecki, Mr. Ellis also told him that that an RCMP investigator would be contacting him to further the investigation. If it were true that a banker and Mr. Ellis’ brother were engaged in fraudulent activity in relation to the Dynasty Project, then this could potentially give rise to reasonable doubt because Mr. Ellis might himself have been the victim of fraudulent conduct in relation to the Dynasty Project. However, the Agreed Statement of Facts directly contradicts Mr. Ellis’s statement to Mr. Makowecki. The admitted facts prove that the RCMP were never investigating an alleged fraud involving Mr. Ellis’ brother or an employee of RBC. This evidence cannot give rise to reasonable doubt.
 
 When I consider the totality of Mr. Ellis’s evidence and other potentially exculpatory evidence, I am not left with reasonable doubt and therefore I would not acquit at the second stage of W(D) with respect to the counts on the Amended Indictment charging fraud over $5,000, use or trafficking in a forged document or personation. However, as I will later describe, despite not believing Mr. Ellis, I have reasonable doubt with respect to counts 7, 15 and 24.
 VI.



Assessment of the Whole of the Evidence
 
 Even though I have concluded that I do not believe Mr. Ellis and that his evidence does not give rise to reasonable doubt, I cannot simply assume that the evidence tendered by the Crown is true. I must therefore assess the totality of the evidence to determine whether the Crown has met its burden to prove the elements of each of the offences beyond a reasonable doubt. 
a)

Credibility Assessment of Crown Witnesses
 
 In undertaking this assessment, I need to firstly consider the credibility and reliability of each of the Crown witnesses. 
 
 Mr. Makowecki was interviewed by police in March 2019 regarding the allegations against Mr. Ellis. Mr. Makowecki provided police with relevant documents in his possession. Police asked whether he had any additional records that might be relevant, and he responded by saying that he had nothing further. Mr. Makowecki’s statement was not true. At the time of making that statement Mr. Makowecki had in his possession tape recordings of two discussions he had with Mr. Ellis during the relevant time. After meeting with police, Mr. Makowecki recorded additional discussions that he had with Mr. Ellis. Those recordings were not disclosed to police.
 
 On the morning that Mr. Makowecki was scheduled to testify, he approached the Crown and disclosed the existence of the recordings. This resulted in an adjournment of the trial to permit the Defence to consider the new disclosure and to determine what position would taken in response. When the trial resumed, Mr. Makowecki explained that he did not disclose the recordings to police because he was concerned that his actions may have been unlawful and that he did not want to make admissions to police. He testified that the recordings were not made to trap Mr. Ellis but instead were made to simply have an accurate record of what was transpiring in the meetings with Mr. Ellis. 
 
 The Defence submits that Mr. Makowecki is lacking in credibility because of his untruthful statements to police. This is a factor that must be considered in relation to Mr. Makowecki’s credibility. The fact that he was prepared to lie to police is a factor that causes me to view his evidence more cautiously. However, much of Mr. Makowecki’s evidence is corroborated by emails, cheques and bank drafts. As a result, while I view Mr. Makowecki’s evidence more cautiously than the other witnesses, I am satisfied that the evidence he gave is credible and reliable.
 
 Kim Mihalcheon is the owner of Barcol and Steelcraft. She testified primarily regarding her dealings with Mr. Ellis and with respect to the Barcol and Steelcraft expense account policies. There was nothing in Ms. Mihalcheon’s evidence that gave rise to any concerns regarding credibility. I am satisfied that she was attempting to be completely truthful in her evidence. However, there were some concerns regarding the probative value of her evidence in relation to expense claims. Ms. Mihalcheon was responsible for the operations of the business not only in Edmonton but also elsewhere. As a result, she travelled extensively and did not have daily direct contact with Mr. Ellis regarding the operation of Barcol. Nor did she have any direct dealings with Mr. Ellis regarding expense claims. Her evidence in relation to expense claims described her personal expectations as to the appropriateness of expense claims rather than the policies and practices that had been implemented at Barcol. Her lack of involvement with the Barcol expense claims policies and procedures makes her evidence in relation to Mr. Ellis’ expense claims of little probative value. 
 
 The remaining Crown witnesses were honest and testified to the best of their ability regarding events that occurred several years ago. Their credibility was not challenged by the Defence. The reliability of their evidence was assisted by extensive emails that were exchanged at the time and by copies of cheques, bank drafts and other banking records to demonstrate the amount of the investments and the dates on which the investments were made. The evidence of these witnesses was both credible and reliable.
b)
 Mr. Ellis’ email Account
 
 Mr. Ellis acknowledged that nellis@***** is an email address that he has used for many years. The records reflect numerous emails to and from this account, some of which are email exchanges with the Tieberts and with each of the investors in the investment projects that are the subject of this litigation. 
 
 Mr. Ellis acknowledged sending and receiving many emails through this email account. However, Mr. Ellis denies that he is the author of several emails sent from this email address. While he had no onus to prove that other persons had been using his email account, he testified that: 
•


his wife had frequent access to his cell phone;
•


when he was at work, he often left his cell phone on his desk while he attended meetings with other staff;
•


sometime in 2017 the internet service provider gave his email account to someone else and it took Mr. Ellis six days to get the account back.
 
 I do not believe Mr. Ellis when he testified that some of the emails from the nellis@***** email account had not been sent by him. The content of the many of the emails which Mr. Ellis disputes contain information and statements that resulted in additional investment in the projects. All the additional investment funds were deposited directly in Mr. Ellis’s RBC accounts and were used by him for his own purposes including the payment of lines of credit and credit card debt. 
 
 Apart from speculation, there is no basis to conclude that emails sent from the nellis@***** email account were created by anyone other than Mr. Ellis. I find that all the emails sent from this email account were authored and sent by Mr. Ellis.
c)

The Dynasty Project
 
 The earliest and largest of the investment opportunities promoted by Mr. Ellis was known as the Dynasty Project. I make the following findings of fact in relation to the Dynasty Project.


















 i.



The Investments by Blackburn, McLean and Makowecki
 
 I find that Mr. Ellis separately represented to each of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki that he and several present or former NHL players, including Mike Bossy, had hired a computer programmer, or coder, to create technology that would provide “live” based software and applications pertaining to professional sports. This technology was initially created for use in NHL games and was intended to provide, in real time, a way to enhance the experience of hockey fans. 
 
 Each of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki invested in the Dynasty Project, but none were aware that the others were participating. Between February 2016 and August 2018, they collectively paid Mr. Ellis almost $1.2 million specifically with respect to the project. The amounts invested can be summarized as follows:
Mr. Blackburn







 $193,795
Mr. McLean








 $399,102
Mr. Makowecki






 $596,409
 
 Mr. Blackburn made his first investment of $18,000 in the Dynasty Project on February 6, 2016. Over the next 17 months ending July 2017, Mr. Blackburn made 31 additional investments in the Dynasty Project. The size of those additional investments ranged from a high of $28,127 to a low of $394. Mr. Blackburn made a final investment of $2,310 one year later in August 2018. 
 
 Mr. McLean made his first investment of $48,000 in the Dynasty Project on March 10, 2016. Over the next 17 months ending in August 2018, Mr. Blackburn made 29 additional investments in the Dynasty Project. The size of those additional investments ranged from a high of $28,800 to a low of $5,500. Mr. McLean made one final investment almost a year later in August 2018 in the amount of $8,840.
 
 Mr. Makowecki made his first investment of $76,813 in the Dynasty Project by way of a loan in September 2016. This was later converted to equity. During the period of October 2016 to June 2018, he made 19 additional investments in the Dynasty Project. The size of those additional investments ranged from a high of $48,333 to a low of $5,078.


















ii.



The Tieberts are Fictional Characters
 
 The investments by Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki in the Dynasty Project shared significant common features. One of those features was that two purported Ontario lawyers, Frank Tiebert and Tom Tiebert, claimed to represent each of the investors by, among other things, negotiating for the sale of the technology to Microsoft and making other arrangements to attempt to facilitate the closing of the transactions. While the lawyers purported to represent Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki, there was virtually no direct contact between them and the lawyers. Instead, almost all communications flowed through Mr. Ellis. 
 
 The one notable exception is that Mr. McLean had a short meeting with Mr. Ellis and with someone holding himself out to be Tom Tiebert at a Starbucks in Edmonton. The meeting was scheduled at a time when it was represented that Mr. Tiebert was passing through Edmonton. It took place at a coffee shop. Mr. Tiebert did not give Mr. McLean his business card or otherwise identify himself. The discussions were general in nature and no specifics were discussed. When viewing that meeting in isolation, it might seem reasonable to conclude that the person Mr. McLean met was Mr. Tiebert. However, when I consider the totality of the evidence, as I will describe later in these reasons, I cannot find that the person Mr. McLean met was actually Tom Tiebert. 
 
 None of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean or Mr. Makowecki had any real information regarding the Tieberts. For example, they did not know which law firm the lawyers were associated with. The investors were never provided with an address for the Tieberts’ law firm. Even when Mr. McLean travelled to Toronto to attend a scheduled meeting with the Tieberts, he did not have their address but, instead, was to be picked up by a driver at his hotel to attend the meeting. Despite his travel to Toronto specifically for this meeting, it did not take place and Mr. McLean returned home without ever seeing or meeting the Tieberts. 
 
 None of the investors had a telephone number with which to contact the Tieberts. 
 
 What is also common to each of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki is that a significant number of additional investment contributions were required because the Tieberts sought additional funds for various purposes. The requests from the Tieberts came by emails that were sent to Mr. Ellis and then forwarded on to the investors. In the case of Mr. Blackburn, the additional funds were requested by the Tieberts for the purpose of purchasing the interests of other Dynasty Project investors including Mike Bossy and other professional hockey players. It was represented to Mr. Blackburn that these hockey players had to dispose of their investment in the Dynasty Project because of a potential conflict of interest with the NHL. In addition, Mr. Blackburn’s cash contributions were required to reimburse the Tieberts for fees and costs, Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) expenses, accounting expenses and other expenses “to meet GAAP” (generally accepted accounting principles). In the case of Mr. McLean, the additional funds were generally for injections into Tiebert’s operating account to fund travel expenses, as well as for other expenses such as “off-set” amounts recommended by an accounting firm, PricewaterhouseCoopers (PWC). In the case of Mr. Makowecki, the additional funds were primarily for purchasing the interests of other investors in the project so that he and Mr. Ellis would each have a 50/50 interest in the project. 
 
 What is also common to each of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki is that during the time that they were being asked to pay additional funds, the Tieberts were making representations regarding the significantly escalating values of the investments. For example: 
•


In the case of Mr. Blackburn, by late July 2016, the Tieberts represented that the agreed sale price for the technology was $9.1 million, which amount was in their trust account waiting for disbursement. 
•


In the case of Mr. Makowecki, the value of the investment was represented by the Tieberts to be as high as $33 million. In May 2018 this amount was represented to be held in the trust account of Miller Thomson in Edmonton for the benefit of B&G (Mr. Ellis) and Makow Properties (Mr. Makowecki’s holding company). 
•


In the case of Mr. McLean, the Tieberts represented in an email dated August 10, 2017 that “the guarantee to the Dynasty Group (McLean 50%; Ellis 50%) would be $32.75Billion USD”. 
 
 I find that the promise of millions (or billions) of dollars of returns within a very short time frame enticed each of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki to make the ongoing contributions and provided them with confidence that the projects had legitimacy, when quite the opposite was true.
 
 What is also common to each of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki is that none of them made any payments directly to the Tieberts. Instead, when the Tieberts sought additional funds, the investors always paid their share of the funds directly to Mr. Ellis for forwarding to the Tieberts. While there are numerous examples of this, I will refer to just a few:
•


On September 13, 2016 at 4:26 pm, Tom Tiebert sent an email to Mr. Blackburn and Mr. Ellis reporting on the current status of the project including the involvement of Bill Gates and Microsoft. With the report Mr. Tiebert also asked for additional funds because the “operating account” was short. The email said in part:

… With the CRA, MS [Microsoft] and Mr. Gates and his foundation involved, it has been a bit daunting at times. I will have all of the details and timing of transfers etc. by tomorrow afternoon, but we are targeting Tuesday September 20th at the very outside. I can tell you without doubt this is the last call for funding. The operating account is short by $6,215.75. Please follow the protocol as usual. 

The protocol that is referred to in the email involved Mr. Blackburn paying Mr. Ellis 50% of the amount requested and then Mr. Ellis combining this amount with his 50% and passing the full amount requested on to the Tieberts.

In an email dated September 13, 2016 at 7:17 pm, Mr. Ellis reported to Tom Tiebert and Mr. Blackburn that 

I completed the transfer as asked 
(emphasis added)

On September 15, 2016, Mr. Blackburn paid $3,107.88 (his 50% of the total $6,215.75) to Mr. Ellis and thanked Mr. Ellis for “… forwarding this amount on our behalf”.

While the banking records show $3,107.88 (50% of the amount requested by Tom Tiebert) being paid by Mr. Blackburn into Mr. Ellis’ personal RBC joint bank account, there is no corresponding entry in the banking records showing the “transfer” of $6,215.75 to Tom Tiebert as had been represented in Mr. Ellis’ email. I conclude that this amount was never transferred by Mr. Ellis to the Tieberts. I find that Mr. Ellis’ email reporting that he had “completed the transfer” was false and was a deception designed to make Mr. Blackburn believe that the funds had been transferred when, in fact, they had not been. 
•


On August 10, 2016 at 9:26 am, Tom Tiebert sent an email to Mr. Ellis and Mr. Blackburn reporting that the target date of the release of the “sale” funds was August 17, 2016. In the same email, Mr. Tiebert asked that additional funds be provided. His email explained:
Given the fact that GAAP is very specific we need $9,250 into the operating account which currently carries a balance of approx. $1,200.
Mr. Tiebert did not explain what specific feature of GAAP required the deposit of funds. Despite the lack of any real explanation, Mr. Blackburn deposited his 50% share, $4,625, into Mr. Ellis’ personal joint RBC account on the same day, August 10, 2016. 
Also on August 10, 2016 at 10:11 am, Mr. Tiebert sent a second email to Mr. Ellis and Mr. Blackburn which said:
Nick, 
Funds received.
Thanks
Tom.
(emphasis added)
While the banking records show Mr. Blackburn’s funds being deposited into Mr. Ellis’ bank account on August 10, 2016, the bank records do not disclose any payment to Mr. Tiebert in the amount of $9,250 at or around that time, or at any time. I find that Mr. Ellis did not pass Mr. Blackburn’s funds on to the Tieberts. Nor did Mr. Ellis pass on to the Tieberts his own share of the expense. I find that the email from Tom Tiebert which confirmed “Funds received” was false and was a deception designed to make Mr. Blackburn believe that his funds and an identical contribution from Mr. Ellis had been sent to the Tieberts. 
•


In November 2016 Tom Tiebert asked for a further $7,825 for “filings”. By email dated November 3, 2016, Mr. Tiebert provided a “Positive update” on the negotiations with the CRA and also confirmed receipt of the $7,825 as follows: 
FYI funds transfer received for the filings – confirmation of $7,825
(emphasis added)
Mr. Blackburn submitted his $3,912.50 to Mr. Ellis. The banking records confirm this deposit into Mr. Ellis’ personal joint RBC account on November 14, 2016. The banking records do not show any transfer to Tom Tiebert or anyone else at or around that time, despite confirmation that $7,825 had been received. I find that Mr. Ellis did not transfer $7,825 to the Tieberts. I find that the Tiebert email that confirmed “funds received” was false and was a deception designed to make Mr. Blackburn believe that the full amount requested by the Tieberts had been transferred. 
•


On September 22, 2016, Frank Tiebert sent an email to Mr. Ellis, Mr. McLean and Tom Tiebert. This email reported on a verbal agreement with Microsoft in principle which would result in a payment to Mr. Ellis and Mr. McLean in the total amount of US$85 million on closing plus annual royalties with a guaranteed minimum of US$18 million in Years 1 and 2. Consistent with the pattern, Mr. Tiebert also requested a payment in the amount of $15,000 to cover additional expenses. 
Mr. McLean promptly paid his share, $7,500, to Mr. Ellis who deposited the funds into his personal joint RBC account on September 23, 2016.
On September 22, 2016, Mr. Ellis sent an email to Frank Tiebert, Mr. McLean and Tom Tiebert which said:
Hi
I just completed the transfer for $15K.
Nick
(emphasis added)
While the banking records disclose Mr. McLean’s $7,500 being deposited into Mr. Ellis’s personal RBC bank account, the banking records do not disclose any transfer of funds to the Tieberts as represented in Mr. Ellis’s email of September 22, 2016. I find that Mr. Ellis did not transfer $15,000 to the Tieberts. I find that Mr. Ellis’ email that represented that he had “just completed the transfer for $15K” was false and was a deception designed to make Mr. McLean believe that his contribution and an equal amount from Mr. Ellis had been paid to the Tieberts. 
•


On December 28, 2016, Frank Tiebert wrote to Mr. Ellis and Mr. McLean confirming that Microsoft was “committing $2.4B based on our delivery of the NBA and NCAA”. The email represented that Microsoft had moved the completion date to January 12, 2017. The email also made a further request for funds:
There is one last ask and we can assure you this is the last time we will need this completed. A cash injection of $18,000 is necessary so we are not in any conflict – this is mostly driven by the NCAA.
There was no explanation as to what the conflict was or how the conflict would be removed with the payment of $18,000. Despite this, Mr. McLean paid Mr. Ellis $9,000 which was deposited into Mr. Ellis’ personal joint RBC account on December 28, 2016. Mr. Ellis then sent an email to Mr. Tiebert and Mr. McLean later on December 28, 2016 which said: 
The transfer for $18K has been completed.
(emphasis added)
However, the banking records do not show any transfer of $18,000 to Mr. Tiebert or to anyone else on or near December 28, 2016. I find that Mr. Ellis did not transfer $18,000 to the Tieberts as represented in his email. This representation was false and was a deception designed to make Mr. McLean believe that his contribution and an equal amount from Mr. Ellis had been paid to the Tieberts. 
•


On February 2, 2017 Frank Tiebert sent an email to Mr. McLean and Mr. Ellis with an update on the status of the transaction. Among other things, the email reported that there was a meeting with “MS (Mr. Gates)” scheduled for February 9, 2017 in Edmonton. The final signing was to take place on February 16, 2017 in Seattle. The funds would be transferred into trust on February 17, 2016 and the funds would be released on February 21, 2017. Consistent with the pattern, the email also asked for additional funds:
Unfortunately we will be covering expenses directly related to our firm as well as expenses related to the union Executive and all expenses abroad. We forecast $22,000. …
Nick: Please complete ASAP per previous protocol
Mr. McLean immediately paid his 50% share of this amount which is shown as being deposited in Mr. Ellis’ personal day-to-day RBC bank account on February 2, 2017. 
Mr. Ellis sent an email on February 2, 2017 and said: 
Thanks Frank. Transfer is complete …
(emphasis added)
However, the banking records do not show a transfer of $22,000 from any of Mr. Ellis’ bank accounts to Mr. Teibert or anyone else on or near February 2, 2017. I find that Mr. Ellis did not transfer $22,000 to the Tieberts as represented in his email. This representation was false and was a deception designed to make Mr. McLean believe that his contribution and an equal amount from Mr. Ellis had been paid to the Tieberts. 
•


On April 18, 2018, Frank Tiebert sent an email to Mr. Ellis reporting that the Dynasty deal was approaching $33 million and that $24,736,260 was currently in trust. Mr. Tiebert explained that an audit had been completed by PWC that identified $41,455 payable to the software developer. Also on April 18, 2018 Mr. Ellis forwarded this email to Mr. Makowecki. Mr. Ellis represented to Mr. Makowecki that “I will make arrangements to get him the final piece asap”. On this basis Mr. Makowecki gave Mr. Ellis a cheque dated April 19, 2018 in the amount of $20,727.50 for his 50% share of the expense. 
The RBC banking records show that Mr. Makowecki’s funds were deposited in Mr. Ellis’ RBC day-to-day banking account on April 20, 2020. However, the banking records do not show a transfer from any of Mr. Ellis’ bank accounts in the amount of $41,455 to the Tieberts in relation to this expense. I find that Mr. Ellis did not transfer $41,455 to the Tieberts as Mr. Ellis represented. Mr. Ellis’ representation was false and was a deception designed to make Mr. McLean believe that his contribution and an equal amount from Mr. Ellis would be paid to the Tieberts. 
 
 The Crown submits that Frank Tiebert and Tom Teibert are not lawyers.
 
 The Agreed Statement of Facts proves that Frank Tiebert and Tom Tiebert are not members of the Law Society of Alberta. A statutory declaration from the Manager of the Membership Services Department of the Law Society of Ontario proves that there is not now, and there has never been, a member of the Law Society of Ontario with the last name Tiebert. 
 
 There are also many unusual features of the evidence that strongly suggest that the Tieberts were not lawyers. For example, many of the requests for funds were for the purpose of covering expenses that the Tieberts were incurring. Even assuming expenses were being incurred by the Tieberts on behalf of their clients, it would be expected that at some point during the two years that Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki were involved as clients, some billing statements would have been provided to the clients to account for the substantial amounts that were paid in relation to the Tieberts’ expenses. None were received and no accounting was provided. This is unusual and further calls into question whether the Tieberts were lawyers.
 
 The exchange of emails makes it clear that the Tieberts had contact information for all of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki. Yet despite purporting to be representing these clients on multi-million-dollar transactions, they had no communication of any kind with Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean or Mr. Makowecki after police were contacted in March 2019. 
 
 The totality of these facts leads me to infer that the Tieberts were not lawyers. 
 
 The email address for Tom Tiebert is also concerning. The email communications with the Tieberts were primarily through an email address, Tom.Tiebert@*****. The Agreed Statement of Facts proves that this email address was set up on May 23, 2016, just a few months after Mr. Blackburn and Mr. MacLean made their first investment in the Dynasty Project. The person who set up the email account through Yahoo! provided a “recovery phone” number of 1 (604) 562 ****. Mr. Ellis has acknowledged that this is the phone number that he has used for years. 
 
 The Agreed Statement of Facts also provides that:
Yahoo! Records confirm that the above “recovery phone” number was “verified”. This means that during the account creation process, an SMS text message was sent to that phone number. The text message contained a unique code, which the phone user then entered in the Yahoo Mail account creation screen to connect the account to that telephone number.
 
 Based on the Agreed Statement of Facts, I find that this email address was activated only after Yahoo! sent a text message to Mr. Ellis’ phone and only after the user of Mr. Ellis’ phone entered the unique code that had been provided by Yahoo!.
 
 The Crown submits that after considering the totality of the evidence relating to the Tieberts and the Tiebert email account, I should infer that the Tieberts were not real people but instead fictional characters. The Crown submits that I should infer that Mr. Ellis was responsible for setting up and operating the Tiebert email account to create the false impression that the Tieberts were legitimate lawyers who were acting on behalf of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki, all for the purpose of lending legitimacy to the project and to entice additional investment from these investors. I conclude that these are clearly inferences that can be drawn from the facts, but before making these inferences I need to consider any other reasonable inferences that would be consistent with reasonable doubt as to Mr. Ellis’ guilt.
 
 One alternate inference is that some other person who is not connected with Mr. Ellis created the Tiebert email account and used it to send messages to Mr. Ellis regarding the Dynasty Project. However, this alternate theory is so remote as to amount to speculation. What is clear is that the Tiebert email account was instrumental in enticing Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki to make substantial additional investments in the Dynasty Project and that 100% of the funds went into Mr. Ellis’ RBC bank accounts. I conclude that this virtually eliminates the possibility that some person unconnected to Mr. Ellis created and operated the Tiebert email account. This potential alternate inference is not reasonable, and the Crown has no obligation to rebut it. 
 
 Another alternate inference is that some unknown person or persons worked in conjunction with Mr. Ellis to create and use the Tiebert email account for the purpose of seeking additional investment contributions from Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki. This alternate theory does not give rise to reasonable doubt because under this theory Mr. Ellis would still be a party to the offence. However, this theory is plausible because of the evidence of the short meeting between Mr. Ellis, Mr. McLean and a person holding himself out to be Tom Tiebert at a Starbucks in Edmonton. Thus, it is possible that Mr. Ellis was working with some unknown person.
 
 I infer that Mr. Ellis was responsible for setting up the email account Tom.Tiebert@***** and that he (or some other person who was acting in conjunction with Mr. Ellis) was the author of the emails from this email account. I also infer that the Tieberts did not exist and were simply fictitious people that were used by Mr. Ellis as a prop to entice Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki to make additional investments into the Dynasty Project.
 
 In drawing these inferences, I consider the content of the email exchanges between the Tieberts and Mr. Ellis and also the fact that these communications were passed on to the investors. As the Court of Appeal recently observed in R v Kebede, 2022 ABCA 353 at para 61:

… In Evans [R v Evans, 1993 CanLII 86 (SCC), [1993] 3 SCR 653] at 662-663, the court referred with approval to R v Ferber (1987), 1987 ABCA 86 (CanLII), 36 CCC (3d) 157, 2 WCB (2d) 102 (Ont CA), where a third party received a phone call from someone believed to be the eventual murder victim, but whom he could not identify. The content of what that person said, however, was treated as circumstantial evidence of her identity. Plainly, the trier of fact could connect the dots. 
(emphasis added)
 
 I conclude that the content of the email exchanges clearly demonstrate that the same person or persons were involved in both sending and receiving messages between Mr. Ellis’ email account and the Tiebert email account. In some instances, the Tieberts confirmed receipt of funds that they had requested, but the banking records demonstrate that the funds were never sent. In other instances, Mr. Ellis confirmed that the amounts had been transferred when the banking records demonstrate that they had not been sent. There is no evidence that the Tieberts followed up to again ask for the funds. I conclude that there was no need to send a reminder because it was known that the transfers were never real.
 
 The evidence leads to only one conclusion. Mr. Ellis, either alone or acting with some other unknown person or persons, was responsible for the operation of the Tiebert email account, which he set up using his own phone number as the recovery phone. Mr. Ellis misrepresented himself as the fictional Tieberts to make reports about significantly escalating Dynasty Project investment values while at the same time asking for additional contributions. 
 
 The evidence in relation to the counts of fraud over $5,000 in relation to Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki is circumstantial. However, the evidence is overwhelming and is not consistent with any other inference that is more than speculative. The evidence does not give rise to any reasonable doubt.
 
 The Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Ellis’ conduct was dishonest and amounted to a deception perpetrated by Mr. Ellis to extract additional monies from each of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki. The evidence also proves beyond a reasonable doubt that each of these investors have been deprived of large amounts of money because of Mr. Ellis’ deception and dishonesty.

















 iii.



Mike Bossy Not Involved in Dynasty Project
 
 The dishonesty and deception of Mr. Ellis goes beyond the use of the fictional Tiebert characters and the use of the Tiebert email account.
 
 Mr. Ellis’ representation that Mike Bossy and other NHL players were involved in the Dynasty Project was false. I conclude that Mr. Ellis made this representation to entice Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki to invest in the project. The Agreed Statement of Facts, and Mr. Ellis’ admissions at trial make it clear that Mr. Bossy was not involved. 
 
 Despite Mr. Bossy not being involved in the Dynasty Project, each of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki received communications from an email address, bossym573@*****. The person sending the email messages represented that he or she was Mike Bossy and provided input regarding the Dynasty Project. Receipt of these emails generally coincided with a request for funds from Tom Tiebert and Frank Tiebert, persons who Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki thought to be lawyers acting on their behalf in relation to the Dynasty Project. For example:
•


on January 25, 2017, when the Tieberts were seeking a further $11,000 from Mr. McLean, an email purportedly from Mike Bossy was forwarded to Mr. McLean. The Bossy email provided encouragement by saying “... I just talked to the boys and it sounds like your going to have a good week. Give me a shout when its done. You and your partner should be pretty excited. Good job.” 
•


on July 13, 2017, at a time when Mr. McLean was being asked to pay a further $15,000, an email purportedly from Mike Bossy was sent to Mr. McLean and Mr. Ellis. The email said in part: “... This is a big deal and obviously confidential. I just wanted to add my 2 cents and make sure you are both good. Frank and Tom are on top of everything and have a handle on Bill Gates too. Don’t mistake Toms bumbling as being dumb, he is very well respected and a genius in the boardroom.”
•


on July 18, 2017, at a time when Mr. Makowecki was being asked by the Tieberts for an additional contribution of $19,107, a person purporting to be Mr. Bossy sent Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Ellis an email in which the author said “... I don’t like the date push but we have to like Franks effort and the found royalty part. I will send my transfer right away and confirm.” The transfer refers to a sale of Mr. Bossy’s 10% interest in the project – an interest he never had.
 
 The bossym573@***** email address was also used to calm Mr. Makowecki after he learned that a letter from the law firm of Miller Thomson confirming that $33 million was being held in trust was a forgery. An email purportedly from Mike Bossy dated October 31, 2018 said:
Hi Boris Mike B here, I’m not supposed to be saying anything but I know you guys are stressed and Nick sure is. I have been contacted a few times about this crazy ride and I just wanted to let you know you guys are safe and secure. Nick really handled things good. the police got involved at the right time and I owe you both a apology because of the two idiots in the deal. I will see you in Feb at the game in Edmonton and I hope to see Blake there to.
(emphasis added)
 
 The bossym573@***** email address was also used to send a message to Mr. Blackburn on August 10, 2016. This was at a time when Mr. Blackburn believed that he and Mr. Ellis were 50/50 partners in the Dynasty Project after having purchased the interest of Mike Bossy. It was also at a time when Mr. Blackburn was being asked to make regular additional investments including:
August 5, 2016







$7,201
August 10, 2016






 $4,625
August 12, 2016






 $5,250
August 15, 2016






 $8,751
August 17, 2016






 $5,807
August 19, 2016






 $1,153
August 22, 2016






 $9,976
August 24, 2016






 $8,720
August 25, 2016






 $6,750
August 26, 2016






 $4,337
 
 The August 10, 2016 Bossy email to Mr. Blackburn did not specifically speak of the Dynasty Project, but it did refer to “our good friend Nick Ellis” and offered to meet with Mr. Blackburn’s son at a “signing event” in Ontario. 
 
 The Agreed Statement of Facts proves that Mr. Bossy did not know of and has never used the bossym573@***** email address. Therefore, someone other than Mr. Bossy surreptitiously set up this account.
 
 The Crown submits that Mr. Ellis was responsible for creating the Mike Bossy email account. The Crown submits that the email communications from the Mike Bossy email account were authored by Mr. Ellis and were designed to provide comfort to each of the investors regarding the legitimacy of the Dynasty Project and, in this way, encourage additional contributions from the investors or to explain delays in the closing of the project. These are reasonable inferences based on the proven facts. However, before coming to any conclusion in relation to these inferences, I need to consider whether there are alternate inferences that are consistent with reasonable doubt as to guilt.
 
 One alternate inference is that some other person, completely unrelated to Mr. Ellis created and operated the bossym573@***** email address. Unlike the Tom Tiebert email account, the person who set up the Mike Bossy email account did not provide a recovery telephone number. In addition, the IP address recorded by Google when the account was created belonged to an Xplornet customer, but their records are not available to determine who that customer was. As a result, there is no direct link between the Mike Bossy email address and Mr. Ellis. This amounts to an absence of evidence that can be used as part of the assessment as to whether there is reasonable doubt regarding whether Mr. Ellis was responsible for creating the email address and using the address by posing as Mr. Bossy. However, this assessment cannot be undertaken in a narrow fashion by simply relying on the absence of evidence of a direct tie between Mr. Ellis and the email account. Instead, it is necessary to look at the whole of the evidence in relation to the email account.
 
 The Agreed Statement of Facts proves that the email address, bossym573@***** was set up through Google LLC on July 26, 2016, after the first Dynasty investments had been made by Mr. Blackburn and Mr. McLean but shortly before the first Dynasty investment of Mr. Makowecki. The August 10, 2016 Bossy email to Mr. Blackburn came only ten days after the bossym573@***** email account was created and at a time when Mr. Blackburn was making substantial payments to Mr. Ellis in relation to the Dynasty Project (in August 2016 a total of ten contributions were made totalling $62,570). I am satisfied that this email provided comfort to Mr. Blackburn regarding the legitimacy of the project because of Mr. Ellis’s close relationship with Mr. Bossy, who Mr. Blackburn thought to be one of the original investors.
 
 The email account was last accessed on November 13, 2018 very shortly after the last investments were made in the Dynasty project. This was also at a time shortly after Mr. Makowecki learned that the Miller Thomson $33 million confirmation letter was a forgery. It was also at a time when, after being pressed by Mr. Makowecki regarding the Dynasty project, Mr. Ellis reported allegations of fraud against his brother and a bank employee, which based upon the Agreed Statement of Facts were false. In short, the last use of the Mike Bossy email account coincided with the recognition that the legitimacy of the Dynasty Project was highly questionable.
 
 The fake Mike Bossy emails were part of a deception that resulted in significant additional investments in the Dynasty Project. Mr. Ellis was the only person who benefited from the additional investments. All the funds went into his personal RBC accounts. None of the funds were paid to other persons who might be legitimately connected to the Dynasty Project. To the contrary, all the funds were used by Mr. Ellis to pay his personal debt obligations on his line of credit, credit card or car loan. No persons benefited from the Dynasty investments other than Mr. Ellis. 
 
 When I consider the totality of the evidence, I conclude that the alternate inference involving some unknown and unrelated person creating and operating the Mike Bossy email account is not a reasonable inference and that the Crown has no obligation to rebut this speculative inference.
 
 Another alternate inference is that some unknown person or persons worked in conjunction with Mr. Ellis to create and use the Bossy email account for the purpose of seeking additional investment contributions from Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki. This alternate theory does not give rise to reasonable doubt because under this theory Mr. Ellis would still be a party to the offence. 
 
 When I consider the totality of the evidence, I infer that the Mike Bossy email account was created by Mr. Ellis and that he, alone or in conjunction with an unknown person or persons, used the account to communicate with Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki while pretending to be Mr. Bossy. I make this inference based on the admitted facts as well as the content and timing of the emails sent from the Mike Bossy email account. 
 
 I therefore conclude that the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Ellis used the Bossy email account in a deceptive fashion with the intention of enticing the investors to provide additional funds in relation to the Dynasty Project, all of which went into the personal RBC bank account of Mr. Ellis. Even if Mr. Ellis did not act alone in sending the emails, he certainly shared a common intention with the author of the emails to craft deceptive messages for Mr. Ellis’ own benefit and in that way was a party to the personation of Mike Bossy and the trafficking of forged emails from the Mike Bossy account. 
 
 I find Mr. Ellis guilty on Count 18, personation of Mike Bossy.
 
 I find Mr. Ellis guilty on Count 19, use, trafficking or possession of the forged emails sent from the Mike Bossy email account. 

















 iv.



Miller Thomson – Bruce Geiger
 
 By late April 2018, Mr. Makowecki had been pressing Mr. Ellis for information regarding the Dynasty Project and the closing of the transaction. I find that Mr. Ellis forwarded to Mr. Makowecki an email from Frank Tiebert which in turn attached a letter dated April 30, 2018 purportedly from Miller Thomson and purportedly signed by “Bruce N. Geiger, Partner – Edmonton”. 
 
 Miller Thomson is a well know national law firm with offices in Edmonton and elsewhere in Canada. The Miller Thomson letter represented that funds in the amount of $33,015,513.86 were being held in an interest-bearing trust account under the Dynasty Group name and for the benefit of B&G Group Ltd and Makow Properties Ltd (Mr. Makowecki’s holding company). 
 
 The Agreed Statement of Facts proves that the Miller Thomson letter was a forgery. Neither Mr. Geiger nor Miller Thomson were involved with the Dynasty Project. The Crown submits that Mr. Ellis used or trafficked in the forged Miller Thomson letter and that he provided the forged letter to Mr. Makowecki to create the impression of legitimacy in relation to the Dynasty Project and to justify further delays in the closing of the transaction.
 
 Mr. Ellis lacks credibility when he suggests that he had no knowledge of the email that attached the forged Miller Thomson letter.
 
 For the reasons I have earlier given, I conclude that the Tieberts did not exist but were fictional persons used as props by Mr. Ellis. I have found that Mr. Ellis was responsible for creating and using the Tiebert email account. I conclude that Mr. Ellis, either alone or working in conjunction with others, used the Tiebert email account to send the forged Miller Thomson letter to Mr. Makowecki. The forged Miller Thomson letter was used by Mr. Ellis to calm Mr. Makowecki and to entice further investment contributions from him.
I conclude that Mr. Ellis knew that the Miller Thomson letter was a forgery. 
 
 An alternate inference that some unknown person or persons unrelated or unconnected to Mr. Ellis forged the Miller Thomson letter and used or trafficked in the forgery by sending it to Mr. Makowecki amounts to nothing other than pure speculation. This theory does not need to be rebutted by the Crown. A second alternate theory that Mr. Ellis worked in conjunction with an unknown person or persons in relation to the use or trafficking of the forged Miller Thomson letter does not give rise to reasonable doubt because Mr. Ellis would still be a party to the offence.
 
 I find that the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Ellis used, trafficked, or possessed the forged Miller Thomson letter dated April 30, 2018. I also find that Mr. Ellis, either alone or acting in conjunction with other unknown persons created the Miller Thomson letter and, in this way, personated Mr. Geiger. 
 
 For these reasons I find Mr. Ellis guilty on count 20 (personation of Bruce Geiger) and count 21 (use or trafficking in a forged document).


















v.



Unconventional Payments
 
 Mr. Ellis testified that he used unconventional payments to pass funds to the Tieberts. This evidence is simply not believable. It defies common sense that lawyers would accept transfers of funds by some sort of a cash drop or through a payday loan account or though other means such as purchasing items at inflated prices at a coin and stamp store. This is particularly so in the context of transactions that were represented to be valued at several millions of dollars. Moreover, as I earlier described, the RBC response to the Production Order does not identify any RBC securities account associated with Mr. Ellis.
 
 Furthermore, in relation to many of the examples of transfers that I earlier referred to, Mr. Ellis’ emails specifically referred to the funds being “transferred”. None of the communications in evidence make any reference to cash drops, delivery of securities or paying inflated prices at a business in West Edmonton Mall. Moreover, in most cases the transfers took place on the same day as the request was made. This would make other forms of unconventional payments virtually impossible. 
 
Mr. Ellis was not being truthful when he described the unconventional payments. Moreover, his evidence on this point does not give rise to reasonable doubt.
 
 Mr. Ellis testified that he had set up a Scotiabank Account in early 2017. He “wanted to believe” that this account was used to send monies received from investors to the Tieberts. I conclude that Mr. Ellis’s evidence in relation to the Scotiabank Account is not believable and is false. 
 
 Moreover, there is positive evidence that the Scotiabank Account did not exist. A Production Order was served on Scotiabank that required the bank to produce “All Scotiabank account opening documents, banking statements … associated to Scotiabank client Nickolas Ellis”. In response, a representative of Scotiabank identified three visa and loan accounts in the name of Mr. Ellis. However, Scotiabank made no reference to any other accounts that may have contained the funds necessary to pay the large amounts that were apparently to be passed on to the Tieberts in relation to the Dynasty Project. This is more than an absence of evidence in relation to the alleged Scotiabank Account. Instead, it is evidence of an absence of the Scotiabank Account. It is positive evidence that the Scotiabank Account never existed.
 
 I find that Mr. Ellis did not have a Scotiabank Account that was used in relation to the transactions referred to in this prosecution.

















 vi.



Conclusion – The Dynasty Project Did Not Exist
 
 I conclude that Mr. Ellis, either alone or working in conjunction with some other unknown person or person, was responsible for using the Tieberts and Mike Bossy as a rouse to create the impression that substantial additional funds were required to ensure completion of the Dynasty Project that was worth millions of dollars or billions of dollars. The scheme was elaborate and resulted in almost $1.2 million being deposited into Mr. Ellis’ personal RBC bank accounts. These funds were used primarily to pay Mr. Ellis’ credit card debt or to discharge other of Mr. Ellis’ personal debt obligations. None of the funds were used to purchase or sell any technology to Microsoft or anyone else.
 
 There is no other viable alternate inference that could give rise to reasonable doubt that does not involve speculation. While the evidence in relation to the Dynasty Project is in many respects circumstantial, I am satisfied that the circumstantial evidence is overwhelming and gives rise to only one conclusion.
 
 I conclude that the Dynasty Project was a sham. It was not real. It existed only in the mind of Mr. Ellis. It existed only for the purpose of extracting very large amounts of money from Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki. The actions of Mr. Ellis were dishonest and deceitful. His actions resulted in each of Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and Mr. Makowecki being deprived of significant funds. Based on the totality of the evidence I conclude that Mr. Ellis knew that his deceit, falsehood and other dishonest acts would cause the deprivation on the part of each of the investors in the Dynasty Project.
 
 Moreover, even if the Dynasty Project had been real, the same interest was fraudulently sold to three different investors. 
 
 I find Mr. Ellis guilty of fraud over $5,000 on count 1 (Mr. Makowecki), count 5 (Mr. Blackburn) and count 10 (Mr. McLean).
d)
 The Reebok Jersey Program
 
 The Agreed Statement of Facts proves that in 2017 and 2018 the NHL was discontinuing its relationship with Reebok for the supply of hockey jerseys and that the league was entering into a new relationship with Adidas. This transition became the genesis of the Reebok Jersey Program.
 
 I make the following findings of fact in relation to the Reebok Jersey Program.
 
 I find that Mr. Ellis represented to those who invested in the Reebok Jersey Program that because of his contacts with the NHL and with US-based distributors of sports memorabilia and other persons in the sports memorabilia industry, he had an opportunity to purchase an inventory of existing Reebok jerseys that would no longer be used in the NHL. Mr. Ellis represented to these investors that the Reebok jerseys would be purchased and that some or all of them would be signed by NHL players. The jerseys would then be framed and distributed for resale. Significantly, Mr. Ellis represented to investors that a large portion of the jerseys had been presold to distributors and that the program would be completed in 2018. This representation caused the investors to believe that the risk in relation to the project was minimal.
 
 All of Mr. McLean, Mr. Makowecki, Mr. Deleeuw (in the name of his wife, Debbie Deleeuw), Mr. Halliday, Mr. Lee and Mr. Hawman became investors in the Reebok Jersey Program. Between September 2017 and September 2018, these investors collectively paid Mr. Ellis or his proprietorship, B&G Group, more than $300,000 specifically with respect to this project. The amounts invested can be summarized as follows:
 



 Group 
 Members of Group 
 Date of First Investment 
 Initial Investment 
 Total Investment 


 Group 1 
 Mr. McLean 
 September 1, 2017 
 $25,000 
 $145,210 


 Group 2 
 Mr. Makowecki Mr. Deleeuw Mr. Halliday 
 November 10, 2017 November 14, 2017 February 4, 2018 
 $39,375 $39,375 $39,375 
 $46,625 $18,219* $39,375 


 Group 3 
 Mr. Lee Mr. Hawman 
 April 5, 2018 April 5, 2018 
 $25,000 $25,000 
 $25,000 $25,000 











*Net of $21,156 that Mr. Deleeuw received from Mr. Ellis in May 2018
 


















 i.



Mr. McLean Invests in Reebok Jersey Program
 
 Mr. McLean made his first investment in the Reebok Jersey Program in September 2017 with a contribution of $25,000 that was deposited into Mr. Ellis’ personal joint RBC account on September 1, 2017. Mr. Ellis represented to Mr. McLean that he and Mr. Ellis were 50/50 partners in the project.
 
 The potential inventory list that Mr. Ellis had received from “Jack” was shared with Mr. McLean for the purpose of discussing which of the jerseys or other hockey equipment would be included in the program.
 
 Mr. Ellis explained to Mr. McLean that “the plan” was that he was going to pay the Edmonton Oilers $120,000 to purchase an inventory of jerseys for the program. On the strength of this representation, Mr. McLean then contributed additional investment funds in September and October 2017 so that his total Reebok Jersey Project investment was approximately 50% of the $120,000. Thereafter Mr. McLean continued making contributions to the Jersey Program until October 2018.
 
 For the reasons I gave earlier, I reject Mr. Ellis’ evidence regarding his dealings with the Edmonton Oilers, or any of its employees in relation to the $120,000 “first big purchase”. I reject Mr. Ellis’ evidence in relation to the alleged $15,000 cash payment for Oilers jerseys. I reject Mr. Ellis’ evidence in relation to any discussions with the Oilers regarding the Reebok Jersey Program. His evidence in this regard is in direct conflict with the Agreed Statement of Facts that provides in part:
... neither the Oilers Entities or the NHL have ever had any discussions with or been involved in any investments or businesses with either the Accused or the “B&G Group”, including the bulk sales of any team jerseys or equipment.
 
 More specifically, I conclude that the cheque in the amount of $120,000 payable to the “Edmonton Oilers Hockey Club” was nothing more than a prop used by Mr. Ellis to lend some legitimacy to the project for the purpose of inducing Mr. McLean to make further financial contributions to the project.


















ii.



Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Deleeuw Invest in Reebok Jersey Program
 
 In October and early November 2017, Mr. Ellis began discussions with Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Deleeuw regarding the Reebok Jersey Program. In emails dated October 16, 2017 and November 2, 2017 Mr. Ellis described the investment as proceeding in three phases with each phase being self-funding after the initial investment of $39,375. The first phase involved the seven Canadian NHL teams. Phase two involved seven US-based NHL teams and Phase three involved an additional seven US-based NHL teams. Mr. Ellis explained in his email that each of the three phases were “50% allocated”. The anticipated return to each investor at the end of the third phase was estimated to be $219,313 on the investment of $39,375.
 
 In November 2017, Mr. Ellis downloaded a Joint Venture Agreement from the internet and completed the document to describe the rights and obligations of the parties in relation to the “Reebok Jersey Program”. The parties to the Joint Venture Agreement were B&G Group (which was Mr. Ellis), Makow Properties Corp Ltd (Mr. Makowecki’s corporation), McLean Investments Ltd (Mr. McLean’s corporation) and Darcy Deleeuw (on behalf of his wife Debbie Deleeuw). 
 
 The Joint Venture Agreement specifically contemplated that Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Deleeuw along with Mr. McLean and Mr. Ellis would each have a 25% interest in the project. I find that while Mr. McLean was identified as one of the parties to the Joint Venture Agreement, he did not sign the agreement. Moreover, Mr. McLean was never aware of any agreement that purported to give him a 25% interest in the project. At all times he understood that he had a 50% interest in the Reebok Jersey Program that he had purchased from Mr. Ellis in September 2017.
 
 The Joint Venture Agreement specified a cash contribution of $39,375 each, as had been described in Mr. Ellis’ earlier email. Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Deleeuw each paid this amount to B&G Group and the funds were deposited into Mr. Ellis’ B&G account at RBC on November 10, 2017 and November 14, 2017 respectively.

















 iii.



Mr. Halliday Invests in Reebok Jersey Program
 
 Mr. Halliday invested in the Reebok Jersey Program with a contribution of $39,375 paid by cheque dated February 4, 2018. This cheque was deposited into Mr. Ellis’ B&G account at RBC on February 5, 2018. 
 
 Both Mr. Ellis and Mr. Halliday participated in modifying the original Joint Venture Agreement that had been signed by Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Deleeuw. The Joint Venture Agreement that was signed by Mr. Halliday had also purportedly been signed by Mr. McLean. The handwritten amendment to the Joint Venture Agreement provides that “25% share transferred to Kent Halliday via Nick Ellis”. An arrow from Mr. McLean’s signature leads directly to these words. 
 
 I find that Mr. McLean was not aware of this Joint Venture Agreement. I find that Mr. McLean’s signature on the Joint Venture Agreement was a forgery. I find that Mr. McLean did not at any time sell his September 2017 interest in the Reebok Jersey Program to Mr. Halliday or anyone else.
 
 Mr. Ellis acknowledged receiving the investment funds from Mr. Halliday in relation to the Reebok Jersey program and he acknowledged that he did not pass those funds on to Mr. McLean.
 
 After the execution of the amended Joint Venture Agreement the parties were B&G (Mr. Ellis), Makow Properties Corp Ltd (Mr. Makowecki), Debbie Deleeuw and Mr. Halliday.
 
 In early 2018, Mr. Deleeuw raised concerns with Mr. Ellis regarding the Reebok Jersey Program and ultimately on May 8, 2018, Mr. Ellis paid Debbie Deleeuw $21,165 as a partial return of this investment. This cheque was honoured by the bank.
 
 In March 2019, Mr. Halliday also raised concerns with Mr. Ellis about the project. In response to these concerns, Mr. Ellis gave Mr. Halliday a cheque in the amount of $321,447 written on the B&G account at RBC. Mr. Ellis asked Mr. Halliday to hold the cheque for a few days so that he could move some money to cover the cheque. Instead of waiting, Mr. Halliday went to the bank to discover that there were insufficient funds in the account. In any event, even if there had been sufficient funds in the account, the cheque could not have been honoured because the amount of the cheque as described numerically did not match the amount as written on the cheque.

















 iv.



Mr. Lee and Mr. Hawman Invest in Reebok Jersey Program
 
 In April 2018, Mr. Lee and Mr. Hawman invested in the Reebok Jersey Program pursuant to the terms of a Joint Venture Agreement dated April 5, 2018. The parties to the agreement were “B&G Group (Nick Ellis)”, Mr. Lee and Mr. Hawman. The Joint Venture Agreement provided that a capital contribution of $25,000 was required from each of the three joint venturers. Mr. Hawman and Mr. Lee both made these capital contributions, and the funds were deposited into the RBC account in the name of B&G on April 2, 2018 and April 5, 2018 respectively. 


















v.



No Disclosure of Other Investors in Reebok Jersey Program
 
 Mr. Ellis testified that he could not recall whether he disclosed to any of the investors in the Reebok Jersey Program the existence of other similar programs with other investors. He testified as follows:
Q.

 Okay. Did you ever disclose to any of the investors in the separate projects the existence of the other projects and other investors?
A.

 I don’t recall.
Q. 

Okay. That would certainly be something you would agree that they should know if you were running –
A.

 I would not agree if they are three separate things then it’s none of their business.
 
 None of the investors in the Reebok Jersey Programs were aware that Mr. Ellis had entered into agreements with other investors that related to NHL jerseys.

















 vi.



Sale of Same Interest to Three Groups of Investors
 
 Mr. Ellis testified that the three groups of investors in the Reebok Jersey Program participated in distinctly different programs. He testified that “the Jersey Project was in three different pieces with three different groups”. He explained this in cross-examination:
Q.

 Okay. I’m quite confused the, I mean, in terms of keeping track of inventory and payments and what not, you must have had a pretty good accounting system to ensure that the three projects weren’t confused with one another.
A.

 I don’t think you need an accounting system.
Q.

 Okay. So how did you know that any particular jersey at any particular time belonged to any of the three projects?
A.

 Because I’ll say again, Terry and I moved into the Upper Deck jerseys which we were receiving. And everybody else was in the Canadian team position or the other NHL teams, that’s not difficult.
 
 As I earlier described, the Joint Venture Agreement signed by Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Deleeuw in November 2017 (later to include Mr. Halliday) is for all practical purposes, identical to the Joint Venture Agreement that was signed by Mr. Lee and Mr. Hawman in April 2018. I find that Mr. Ellis sold the very same interest in the Reebok Jersey Program to these two groups of investors. However, even before dealing with Mr. Makowecki and Mr. Deleeuw, the Reebok Jersey Program had been sold to Mr. McLean. Thereafter, Mr. Ellis had nothing to sell to the other groups. Mr. Ellis used nondisclosure agreements and other means to prevent the investors from discovering that their interest in the Reebok Jersey Program had been sold to others. His conduct was dishonest and deceitful.
 
 The reference by Mr. Ellis to Upper Deck involved, amongst other things, a photo shoot in Las Vegas in relation to Connor McDavid’s 21st birthday. Mr. Ellis represented that Mr. Wong would be the photographer responsible for the photos. Mr. McLean made additional investments in the project to finance Mr. Wong’s expenses associated with travel to Las Vegas and the costs incurred in the photo shoot. As I will describe later in these reasons, this photo shoot did not take place. Mr. Wong was never retained to do such a photo shoot and he did not travel to Las Vegas for this purpose. 
 
 The Agreed Statement of Facts proves that Upper Deck has never had any discussions with or been involved in any investments or businesses with either Mr. Ellis or the “B&G Group”. I find that the Upper Deck “piece” that Mr. Ellis testified to did not exist. It was pure fiction. I find that the Upper Deck “piece” was a further false narrative presented by Mr. Ellis to induce Mr. McLean to make further contributions to the project.
















 vii.



Wei Wong was Not Involved in the Reebok Jersey Program
 
 Mr. Ellis represented to each of the Reebok Jersey Program investors that Mr. Wei Wong of Vestate would be involved in the framing of the jerseys so that they could be forwarded to distributors for sale. Prior to making their investment, each of the investors were taken to the Vestate premises for a tour. All agreed that it was a very impressive facility. All had confidence that Vestate and Mr. Wong had the skill and experience to professionally frame and process the jerseys as part of the Reebok Jersey Program. 
 
 Mr. Ellis did speak to Mr. Wong about a potential large framing project and Mr. Wong was interested in participating in the project. However, Mr. Wong testified, and I find, that he never became involved with the Reebok Jersey Program or any similar program involving Mr. Ellis. 
 
 Mr. Wong did frame some jerseys for Mr. Ellis in 2017 and 2018. However, this work was for Mr. Ellis’ personal collection. The number of jerseys framed was small and not of the commercial nature suggested by the Reebok Jersey Program
 
 I find that Mr. Ellis used the name and reputation of Mr. Wong and the tours of the Vestate facility to add an air of authenticity to the Reebok Jersey Program and in this way induced investors to make financial contributions to the project. 
 
 An email account, wwedmphotographer@***** was used for the purpose of sending emails purportedly from Mr. Wong to one or more of the investors or groups of investors, usually through Mr. Ellis. For example:
•


on March 28, 2018, Mr. Ellis forwarded to Mr. Lee an email purportedly from Mr. Wong through the wwedmphotographer@***** account which reported that 190 jerseys had been shipped on March 27, 2018, another 190 jerseys were to be shipped that day, March 28, 2018 and that another 190 jerseys would be shipped by mid-April 2018. This email was sent to Mr. Lee as he and Mr. Hawman were considering whether they would invest in the Reebok Jersey Program. 
All the representations in the email purportedly from Mr. Wong were false. 
Within a few days of receiving this email Mr. Lee and Mr. Hawman made their investment in the Reebok Jersey Program. Each provided Mr. Ellis with a cheque for $25,000. These funds were deposited in Mr. Ellis’s personal RBC accounts.
•


in June 2018 the wwedmphotographer@***** email account was used to send a series of emails to Mr. Ellis and Mr. McLean that described the work that Mr. Wong had been doing in Las Vegas with Upper Deck in relation to a series of photographs of NHL players. Mr. Wong explained that Upper Deck wanted to pre-order 100,000 framed photographs that were to be taken at an awards ceremony in Las Vegas. 
All the representations in the purported email from Mr. Wong were false. 
The purported email from Mr. Wong came with a request for funds to cover expenses. As a result of these emails Mr. McLean paid Mr. Ellis over $11,000 as his share of the purported expenses.
•


on August 5, 2018, the wwedmphotographer@***** email account was used to send an email to Mr. Ellis and Mr. McLean. This email reported on Mr. Wong’s trip to Las Vegas for the purpose of a photo shoot for Connor McDavid’s 21st birthday. The email represented that “UD [Upper Deck] is working nice with my team and we sent the photos for signature and authentication for McDavid and authentication for all other. There (sic) is 75% sold of all photos taken in Vegas and expected to receive $400K from UD by August 31. Jersey sales will be complete by September 1 and last shipment sent to Scott last week”. 
All the representations in the purported email from Mr. Wong were false.
 
 Mr. Wei Wong testified that he did not create and has never had an email account by the name wwedmphotographer@*****. I find that Mr. Wong was not the author of any emails that originated from that account. I find that Mr. Wong was never in Las Vegas for a photo shoot in relation to Connor McDavid’s 21st birthday or for any work in relation to the Upper Deck “piece” that Mr. Ellis referred to. 
 
 The Agreed Statement of Facts proves that the wwedmphotographer@***** email account was created on January 21, 2018. The person who set up this email account provided a phone number. That number was 604 562 ****. This is a telephone number that Mr. Ellis acknowledged he has used for many years. 
 
 The Crown submits that I should infer that the wwedmphotographer@***** email account was created and used by Mr. Ellis for the purpose of enticing additional investment in the Reebok Jersey Program. This is a possible inference that can be made from the evidence, but before arriving at a conclusion in relation to this inference I first need to consider other alternate inferences that would potentially give rise to reasonable doubt.
 
 One alternate inference is that some unknown and unrelated person created the wwedmphotographer@***** email account and used it to communicate with the investors in the Reebok Jersey Program. I have considered this alternate inference and conclude that this would be an unreasonable inference in the circumstances. All of the emails from this account were tailored to achieve a benefit for Mr. Ellis. No unrelated person benefited from these emails. This alternate theory is entirely speculative, and the Crown has no obligation to rebut the theory.
 
 Another alternate inference is that some unknown person or persons worked in conjunction with Mr. Ellis to create and use the wwedmphotographer@***** email account. This alternate theory does not give rise to reasonable doubt because under this theory Mr. Ellis would still be a party to the offence. 
 
 I infer that Mr. Ellis, alone or in conjunction with an unknown person or persons, created the wwedmphotographer@***** email account and was responsible for the emails that were sent from the account. Not only was Mr. Ellis’ phone number associated with the email account, but the emails sent from the account were clearly intended to provide comfort regarding the legitimacy of the project with a view to inducing investment in the project or to explain the delays in the completion of the project. The investments in the Reebok Jersey Program were all deposited into one or more of Mr. Ellis’ personal RBC accounts. He was the only person who derived any benefit from the emails coming from the wwedmphotographer@***** email account.
 
 There is no other reasonable explanation that could give rise to reasonable doubt.
 
 I find that the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Ellis used, trafficked, or possessed the forged emails created on the wwedmphotographer@***** email account. Even if Mr. Ellis did not act alone in sending the emails, he certainly shared a common intention with the author of the emails to craft deceptive messages for Mr. Ellis’ own benefit, and in that way, was a party to the offences.
 
 For these reasons I find Mr. Ellis guilty on count 22 (personation of Wei Wong) and count 23 (use or trafficking in a forged document).
















viii.



John Wong Texts
 
 In January 2019, Mr. Hawman received a text message purportedly from a lawyer, John Wong. Mr. Wong told Mr. Hawman that he was representing Mr. Hawman and Mr. Lee in relation to the “Upper Deck Reebok Jersey Project”. He was attempting to arrange for a meeting to discuss the project and the potential need for Canada wide incorporation. 
 
 The evidence regarding the texts from John Wong is extremely limited. I am not able to draw any inferences or come to any conclusions from these texts.

















 ix.



Conclusion – The Reebok Jersey Program Did Not Exist
 
 When I consider the totality of the evidence, I infer that the Reebok Jersey Program was never real, but instead was a sham and was designed for only one purpose; to enrich Mr. Ellis at the expense of the investors. I find that Mr. Ellis used a series of elaborate strategies designed to make it appear to the investors that the project was real and worthy of investment. He used the false representations regarding a payment of $120,000 to the Oilers, the reputation of Mr. Wong, the tours of the Vestate facilities, the false wwedmphotographer@***** email account and reference to the involvement of sports personalities such as Connor McDavid to create a false impression of legitimacy. 
 
 Moreover, even if the Reebok Jersey Program had been real, the same interest was fraudulently sold to three different groups of investors. 
 
 The totality of the evidence does not permit any other potential explanation that could give rise to reasonable doubt regarding Mr. Ellis’ fraudulent actions in relation to the Reebok Jersey Program.
 
 Of the investors in the Reebok Jersey Program, only Mr. Deleeuw received any return. He received from Mr. Ellis $21,156 in May 2018. This reduced his loss on the project to $18,219. The remaining investors had no return and lost their entire investment, resulting in losses of approximately $300,000.
 
 For these reasons I find Mr. Ellis guilty of fraud over $5,000 on Count 1 (Mr. Makowecki), Count 6 (Mr. Deleeuw or his wife), count 8 (Mr. Lee), Count 9 (Mr. Hawman), count 10 (Mr. McLean) and count 13 (Mr. Halliday). As I noted earlier, I also found Mr. Ellis guilty on Counts 1 and 10 in relation to the Dynasty Project.
e)

The Bridge Financing Project
 
 I make the following findings of fact in relation to the Bridge Financing Project.
 
 In November 2017, Mr. Ellis approached Mr. Nikicevic regarding an investment opportunity involving bridge financing of commercial buildings which had reached the final construction stage but had not yet been sold. I find that Mr. Ellis represented that a total of nine persons were involved in the investment group and that each participant contributed funds to carry the cost of the building until such time as it was sold. On the sale of the building, the bridge financing was to be repaid along with a portion of the profit from the transaction.
 
 I find that Mr. Ellis represented that two of the members of the investment group were Kevin Lowe and Craig McTavish. Mr. Nikicevic knew these two persons to be retired NHL players then associated with the Edmonton Oilers. Mr. Ellis’ point of contact with the investment group was represented to be Kevin Lowe.
 
 I find that Mr. Ellis represented to Mr. Nikicevic that all the nine investors would contribute the same amount to the investment, $24,500. On November 1, 2017, Mr. Nikicevic gave Mr. Ellis a bank draft in the amount of $24,500 and this was deposited into Mr. Ellis’ B&G account at RBC on the same day. However, the RBC banking records do not show that the contribution from Mr. Nikicevic was passed on by Mr. Ellis to Kevin Lowe or anyone else who may have been managing the Bridge Financing Project.
 
 On or about December 5, 2017, Mr. Ellis approached Mr. Nikicevic and explained that one of the nine investors in the group was leaving and that it was necessary that they purchase his interest. Mr. Ellis explained that each of them would need to contribute an additional $15,750 for a total payment to the exiting investor of $31,500. Mr. Nikicevic complied and gave Mr. Ellis a second bank draft, this one was in the amount of $15,750. The RBC banking records show that these funds were deposited into Mr. Ellis’ B&G account at RBC on December 5, 2017. The RBC banking records do not show a payment from Mr. Ellis’ RBC accounts in the amount of $31,500 (or $15,750 or any other amount) to the exiting investor or to anyone else.
 
 I find that over the next several months, Mr. Ellis reported to Mr. Nikicevic on the status of the investment. All the reports were general in nature: “going great” and “we have some interest”. In April 2018, Mr. Ellis reported that the property had been sold and that Mr. Nikicevic’s share of the proceeds was $75,000. I find that during that discussion Mr. Ellis represented to Mr. Nikicevic that these funds had been rolled over to a new opportunity.
 
 Placement of the proceeds from the first transaction into a second transaction caused Mr. Nikicevic some real concern. Very shortly after making his first investment, Nr. Nikicevic asked Mr. Ellis for some documentation regarding the investment including, for example, the land titles documents. Mr. Ellis promised to provide these documents, but they were never forthcoming. For this reason, Mr. Nikicevic was concerned about any involvement with the second investment. However, since Mr. Ellis was his employer, Mr. Nikicevic felt constrained as to how forcefully he could express his concern.
 
 I find that some months later, Mr. Ellis told Mr. Nikicevic that the second building had been sold and that the proceeds were to be distributed. I find that Mr. Ellis explained that the distribution would take place at the Derrick Club. Mr. Nikicevic arranged to meet Mr. Ellis at the Derrick Club at the appointed time to collect his portion of the proceeds. However, when he arrived at the Derrick Club Mr. Ellis was not there.
 
 Mr. Ellis and Mr. Nikicevic spoke later about the missed meeting and Mr. Ellis explained that “I got hung up”. Mr. Ellis explained that he would set up another meeting at the Derrick Club to distribute the funds. Once again Mr. Nikicevic went to the Derrick Club, but Mr. Ellis was not there. Neither were Kevin Lowe or Craig McTavish.
 
 Several months later, after both Mr. Nikicevic and Mr. Ellis had been terminated from Barcol, they met by chance at a Home Depot in Sherwood Park. Despite his representation months earlier that the second project had been sold, Mr. Ellis explained that the investment was “not quite ready”. Mr. Ellis told Mr. Nikicevic that as a sign of good faith, he would give Mr. Nikicevic $100,000. He then provided Mr. Nikicevic with a cheque in the amount of $100,000 written on the B&G account at RBC. Mr. Ellis asked Mr. Nikicevic to hold the cheque for a few days so the funds could be moved. 
 
 Mr. Nikicevic attempted to negotiate the cheque two days later, March 15, 2019. The cheque was dishonoured by the bank. The total amount in the B&G account at that time was $281.
 
 As I described earlier in these reasons, Mr. Ellis had also given Mr. Halliday a cheque dated March 15, 2019 written on the B&G account. The amount of the cheque was $231,442. Mr. Halliday also took this cheque to the bank to find that there were insufficient funds in the account to honour the cheque. As I will describe shortly, Mr. Ellis also provided Mr. Halliday a second cheque at the same time, also payable on the B&G account. The amount of this cheque was $652,000 and was intended to be a shareholders loan in relation to the Barcol acquisition. 
 
 I find that Mr. Ellis’ gesture of good faith in providing the $100,000 cheque to Mr. Nikicevic was not in any way genuine. I find that Mr. Ellis was simultaneously using the RBC B&G account to attempt to satisfy total obligations of almost $1 million. But the account had virtually no positive balance. Mr. Ellis’s gesture was disingenuous. 
 
 I find that neither Kevin Lowe nor Craig McTavish were involved in the bridge financing project. I find Mr. Ellis’ explanation that the project involved “some guys at the golf course” is false. 
 
 I infer that the bridge financing project was never real. Instead, it was a sham that was designed to enrich Mr. Ellis at the expense of Mr. Nikicevic. 
 
 The alternate theory that the Bridge Financing Project was real and involved a “group of guys” at the golf course is completely inconsistent with the representations that were made by Mr. Ellis at or near the time that the investments were made. Mr. Ellis represented that the group of investors included Kevin Lowe and Craig McTavish not a “group of guys” at the golf course. Moreover, Mr. Ellis represented that the investment was concluded, and that the payout would be made at the Derrick Club. There are no alternate theories that can give rise to reasonable doubt. 
 
 Mr. Nikicevic invested a total of $40,250 in the bridge financing project which was paid to B&G Group, Mr. Ellis’ proprietorship. All these funds were lost.
 
 Mr. Ellis’ conduct in relation to the Bridge Financing Project was dishonest and deceitful and resulted in Mr. Nikicevic being deprived of $40,250. I find that Mr. Ellis was aware that his dishonesty and deception would result in this deprivation.
 
 I find Mr. Ellis guilty of fraud over $5,000 in relation to count 12.
f)

 The Barcol Acquisition Project
 
 I find that in or about late 2018 or early 2019, Mr. Ellis separately approached each of Mr. Makowecki, Mr. Deleeuw and Mr. Halliday regarding an opportunity to invest in the acquisition of an interest in Barcol. When presenting the proposals, Mr. Ellis represented that the owner of Barcol, Kim Mihalcheon, was experiencing serious health issues and that she wanted to sell Barcol quickly.
 
 I find that to persuade Mr. Makowecki to invest in the Barcol Acquisition Project, Mr. Ellis represented that he would install Mr. Makowecki as the Chairman of the Board of Barcol. Mr. Makowecki was interested in the proposal to purchase Barcol. However, he advised Mr. Ellis that he was only interested in doing so with professional advice and assistance from his accountants and lawyers. The discussions with Mr. Makowecki went no further and an investment was not made.
 
 Mr. Deleeuw was also interested in participating in a potential acquisition of Barcol. Mr. Deleeuw took the opportunity to undertake some due diligence by contacting an accountant, Mr. Severin. As a result of that due diligence Mr. Deleeuw declined to participate.
 
 I find that Mr. Ellis also approached Mr. Halliday to invest in the Barcol Acquisition Project. On January 24, 2019, Mr. Halliday agreed to participate. He did so by paying Mr. Ellis $25,000 for a 50% interest in B&G Group Ltd. The remaining shares in B&G Group Ltd were to be owned by Mr. Ellis so that Mr. Ellis and Mr. Halliday would “be partners in the venture”. Mr. Ellis represented that B&G Group Ltd was at that time in the process of acquiring 93.75% ownership in Barcol and 23.5% ownership of Steelcraft. 
 
 After making the investment of $25,000 on January 24, 2019 to purchase a 50% interest in B&G Group Ltd, Mr. Halliday also made a further investment of $24,475 on March 8, 2019 with a cheque payable to B&G Group for the purpose of obtaining the Minute Book of the corporation from the corporate solicitor, Mr. John Huckle. 
 
 Mr. Ellis acknowledged that he had never spoken to Ms. Mihalcheon about the potential for a purchase of Steelcraft. He explained however that Ms. Mihalcheon had expressed an interest in keeping a small stake in Barcol. Mr. Ellis reasoned that if he expressed an interest in purchasing a small piece of Steelcraft this might persuade Ms. Micalcheon to agree to sell 100% of Barcol in exchange for Mr. Ellis not seeking to purse the small interest in Steelcraft.
 
 Mr. Ellis testified that to further pursue the acquisition, Mr. Ellis approached two banks, including RBC, with a business plan. He testified that he was fairly confident that he could obtain financing of approximately $3 - 3.5 million with which to pursue the acquisition of Barcol. I observe that the RBC response to the Production Order makes no reference to an application for a $3 - $3.5 million loan in relation to the purchase of Barcol. 
 
 In March 2019 when Mr. Halliday raised concerns regarding the investment, Mr. Ellis gave Mr. Halliday a cheque in the amount of $652,000 drawn on the RBC account of B&G Group. This cheque was to represent a shareholder’s loan to Mr. Halliday from B&G and was to be funded from the financing that Mr. Ellis testified he expected to receive from one of the banks he had approached to fund the purchase of Barcol. Mr. Ellis asked Mr. Halliday to hold the cheque for a few days before negotiating it. Mr. Halliday did not do this and instead discovered that there were insufficient funds in the account to honour the cheque. As I explained earlier in these reasons, the balance in Mr. Ellis’ B&G account at RBC account at that time was $281.
 
 I find that the proposal to purchase Barcol was not real. Mr. Ellis had absolutely no basis in fact to represent that B&G Group Ltd. was in process of acquiring 93.75% ownership in Barcol and 23.5% ownership of Seelcraft. This was dishonest and a deception designed extract funds from Mr. Halliday only for the purpose enriching Mr. Ellis.
 
 I find that B&G Group Ltd never existed as a corporate entity and that Mr. Ellis could not possibly have conveyed shares to Mr. Halliday. I further find that Barcol was never for sale, that Ms. Mihalcheon was not experiencing health related issues and she had no interest in selling Barcol. As a result, there are no alternate theories that could give rise to reasonable doubt.
 
 Mr. Halliday received nothing in return for his investment in the Barcol acquisition project. It was a total loss.
 
 I find Mr. Ellis guilty of fraud over $5,000 on Count 13. Earlier in these reasons I also found Mr. Ellis guilty on Count 13 in relation to the Reebok Jersey Program.
g)

Other Projects – Telus and Gretzky
 
 In May 2018, Mr. Makowecki participated in two additional investments with Mr. Ellis, both of which were said to be related in some way to the Dynasty Project or the Reebok Jersey Program. 


















 i.



Telus Project
 
 The Telus project related to the development of additional software for Telus. This project involved the same computer programmer, or coder, who had been used in relation to the Dynasty Project. The Telus project also involved the same “lawyer” as had been used in relation to the Dynasty Project. Mr. Makowecki agreed to participate in this opportunity and gave Mr. Ellis a cheque in the amount of $30,375 on May 2, 2018. These funds were deposited to Mr. Ellis’ day-to-day banking account at RBC on May 3, 2018. This was only a few days after Mr. Makowecki received a copy of the forged Miller Thomson letter that purported to confirm that $33 million was being held in trust for the Dynasty Project.
 
 There is very little evidence before me in relation to the Telus project. I find that Mr. Makowecki’s investment in the project was given to Mr. Ellis and that Mr. Makowecki did not get any return from the project. I also find that the project was represented to be related to the Dynasty Project that I have found was a sham. However, there is insufficient evidence before me to in relation to the Telus Project to satisfy me that the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt fraudulent conduct on the part of Mr. Ellis in relation to this project. Thus, the evidence in relation to the Telus Project plays no part in my decision with respect to the charges on the Amended Indictment against Mr. Ellis.


















ii.



Gretzky Project
 
 Mr. Makowecki received an email from Mr. Ellis dated May 7, 2018 which reported that “we have a huge opportunity with Upper Deck and a Wayne Gretzky collection”. This was approximately five days after he made the $30,375 investment in the Telus Project. More importantly, the Gretzky Project arose one week after Mr. Makowecki received the letter from Miller Thomson confirming that they held $33 million in trust for the Dynasty Project. This letter was a forgery and Miller Thomson did not hold any money for the Dynasty Project, but this did not become known to Mr. Makowecki until several months later.
 
 Attached to Mr. Ellis’ email dated May 7, 2018 was an email from “Mike Phillips VP Sales”. The email does not say specifically which company Mr. Phillips was associated with, but the strong implication is that he held himself out to be with Upper Deck. 
 
 Mr. Phillip’s email described a licencing arrangement for nine new collections of limited issue merchandise relating to Wayne Gretzky. The project involved a financial commitment totalling $225,000 with Upper Deck paying 50% and Mr. Ellis and Mr. Makowecki each contributing 25%. The contribution of Mr. Ellis and Mr. Makowecki was to total $112,500. In accordance with this arrangement Mr. Makowecki paid Mr. Ellis $56,250 which was deposited into Mr. Ellis RBC account on May 9, 2018. 
 
 A further contribution of $38,649 was paid by Mr. Makowecki to Mr. Ellis and deposited to Mr. Ellis’ RBC account on May 31, 2018. 
 
 Mr. Ellis also represented that Mr. Wei Wong would be involved in this project. An email purportedly from Mr. Wong via the wwedmphotographer@***** account was also provided to Mr. Makowecki. This email further promoted the project. I have earlier found that the wwedmphotographer@***** account was not created or operated by Mr. Wong but was instead created and operated by Mr. Ellis.
 
 The RBC banking records show that Mr. Makowecki’s funds in relation to the Gretzky project were deposited into Mr. Ellis’s RBC account. However, there is no corresponding entry in the records to show that Mr. Makowecki’s contribution and an equal contribution from Mr. Ellis were forwarded on to Upper Deck or to anyone else. I find that Mr. Ellis kept Mr. Makowecki’s investment funds for his own use. He did not pass the funds on to Upper Deck or any other person who should properly have received the funds.
 
 As I previously discussed, the Agreed Statement of Facts proves that Upper Deck “has never had discussions with or been involved in any investments or business with either the Accused or the “B&G Group”. Therefore, despite his representations to Mr. Makowecki, Mr. Ellis did not have any relationship with Upper Deck with respect to the Gretzky Project, or anything else.
 
 Mr. Makowecki lost his entire investment in relation to the Gretzky project.
 
 When I consider the totality of the evidence, I infer that the Gretzky Project was a sham. It was not real. It existed only in the mind of Mr. Ellis. It existed only for the purpose of extracting very large amounts of money from Mr. Makowecki. The actions of Mr. Ellis were dishonest and deceitful. There is no alternate inference that is reasonable given all of the circumstances.
 
 Mr. Ellis’ actions resulted in Mr. Makowecki being deprived of significant funds. Given all the circumstances I conclude that Mr. Ellis knew that his deceit, falsehood and other dishonest acts would cause the deprivation.
 
 I find Mr. Ellis guilty of fraud over $5,000 on Count 1 (Mr. Makowecki). Earlier in these reasons I found Mr. Ellis guilty on count 1 in relation to both the Dynasty Project and the Reebok Jersey Program.
VII.



Crown Failed to Prove Counts 7, 15 and 24 Beyond a Reasonable Doubt
 
 Notwithstanding that I do not believe Mr. Ellis and notwithstanding that his evidence does not leave me with reasonable doubt in relation to most of the counts on the Amended Indictment, I conclude that the Crown has failed to prove three of counts beyond a reasonable doubt. 
a)

Count 7 – Attempted Fraud
 
 The Crown submits that when Mr. Ellis approached Mr. Deleeuw in relation to the Barcol acquisition project, he was attempting to commit a fraud. I conclude that the Crown has not proven the elements of this offence beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
 Mr. Ellis was being dishonest when he was told Mr. Deleeuw that Ms. Mihalcheon had cancer. Mr. Ellis was not being candid with Mr. Deleeuw when he said that Ms. Mihalcheon was a motivated seller. 
 
 However, Mr. Ellis testified that Barcol required some structural changes to make it more efficient. In particular, he observed that there was a problem with the relationship between Steelcraft as the parent company, and Barcol the subsidiary. This was because Barcol could only sell Steelcraft products and was therefore “beholden to Steelcraft”. For this reason, and given his background in acquisitions, Mr. Ellis felt that Barcol was an acquisition target. There was no evidence to suggest that this was not Mr. Ellis’ legitimate opinion at the time. 
 
 Mr. Ellis has experience in the acquisition of companies and in his opinion, even though Ms. Mihalcheon may not have been a willing seller of Barcol, Mr. Ellis was of the view that “everything is for sale” if the price is right. There is no evidence to suggest that this was not his honest opinion.
 
 Moreover, the discussions with Mr. Deleeuw were held in 2018, and were preliminary discussions only. The discussions were very general. No promises were made regarding what could be achieved. Instead, the discussions consisted only of determining whether Mr. Deleeuw was interested in participating in an acquisition project. Mr. Deleeuw did his own due diligence and concluded that he did not want to participate.
 
 The discussions with Mr. Deleeuw were much different from the discussions with Mr. Halliday, where very specific representations were made and where Mr. Halliday was sold shares of a non-existent corporation.
 
 I have reasonable doubt as to whether the conduct of Mr. Ellis was fraudulent in relation to his dealings with Mr. Deleeuw and the Barcol Acquisition project.
 
 I find Mr. Ellis not guilty on Count 7.
b)
 Count 15 – Barcol Expense Claims
 
 The Crown submits that Mr. Ellis is guilty of fraud under $5,000 in relation to two specific expense claims that were made by Mr. Ellis in September and October 2018. 


















 i.



Fins and Skins
 
 The first of the expense claims related to reimbursement of the cost of flights for several persons who participated in a “fins and skins” event. I find that Mr. Ellis booked and paid for flights for 12 persons including himself, Mr. Deleeuw, Mr. Halliday, Mr. Makowecki, Mr. Blackburn, Mr. McLean and some Barcol employees. The flights departed Edmonton on Tuesday, September 11, 2018 for Abbotsford B.C. and returned to Edmonton on Saturday, September 15, 2018. The total cost of the flights was $4,251. 
 
 On September 6, 2018, prior to the flights departing, Mr. Ellis submitted an expense claim to Barcol which included the cost of the flights along with other expenses that were unrelated to the “fins and skins” trip. The total of the expense claim was $6,528.87. Barcol paid this claim, and the amount was deposited into Mr. Ellis’ RBC bank account on the same day as the claim was submitted, September 6, 2018. The flights then departed five days later, September 11, 2018.
 
 Mr. Halliday testified that he paid for the fishing component of the “fins and skins” trip. However, he confirmed that Barcol paid for the flight. He explained that the “fins and skins” trip was a business trip for members of the Barcol team and customers. He participated in the trip because of his expressed interest in joining Barcol. He explained that Mr. Ellis told him that it was very important for him to be on the trip. From a business perspective, payment of Mr. Halliday’s flight costs may or may not have been in accordance with corporate policy. However, I conclude that the payment for Mr. Halliday’s air travel is far removed from fraud.
 
 Mr. Makowecki testified that he paid for all his expenses in relation to the “fins and skins” trip. He said that he paid for his own flight and that he gave Mr. Ellis a cheque for the cost of the fishing. I accept that Mr. Makowecki may have given a cheque to Mr. Ellis for the fishing. But the records from Swoop Airlines tendered by the Crown show that Mr. Ellis paid for Mr. Makowecki’s flight. It is possible that Mr. Makowecki reimbursed Mr. Ellis for the cost of the flight. If this happened, it is unclear from the evidence whether this was before or after Mr. Ellis submitted the expense claim.
 
 Mr. McLean testified to the same effect. He said that he paid for his expenses for the trip and that he paid for his own airfare. However, I find that Mr. Ellis paid for Mr. McLean’s airfare. It is certainly possible that Mr. McLean reimbursed Mr. Ellis for the cost of the airfare but, as was the case with Mr. Makowecki, it is unclear on the evidence whether this was before or after the trip or before or after Mr. Ellis submitted the expense claim.
 
 Mr. Deleeuw was less clear in his evidence. Mr. Deleeuw explained that he probably traveled on Swoop Airlines for the trip. I find that he did travel on Swoop Airlines for the trip and that Mr. Ellis paid for the cost of the trip and included this cost in his expense claim to Barcol. Mr. Deleeuw said, and I accept, that he paid for the trip, but this must have been through a reimbursement to Mr. Ellis. Mr. Deleeuw did not explain when he reimbursed Mr. Ellis. Specifically, he did not say whether this was before or after Mr. Ellis submitted the expense claim to Barcol. 
 
 I find that Barcol paid Mr. Ellis for the cost of airfare for each of Mr. Makowecki, Mr. McLean and Mr. Deleeuw. I also find that some portions of the airfare were also paid by one or more of Mr. Makowecki, Mr. McLean and Mr. Deleeuw. However, the evidence falls short of proving fraud beyond a reasonable doubt. There remains a reasonable possibility that when he submitted the expense claim to Barcol, Mr. Ellis had not been reimbursed for any of the airfare by any of Mr. Makowecki, Mr. McLean or Mr. Deleeuw. 
 
 To find fraud I would need to infer that Mr. Ellis intended to deprive Barcol. To make this interference, I would need to conclude that there are no other reasonable inferences that are consistent with reasonable doubt. One reasonable inference is that when he submitted the expense claim Mr. Ellis assumed that Barcol was to pay for the airfare for all participants because he assumed that it was a reasonable business expense, even though Ms. Mihalcheon or Barcol may have had a different view of the reasonableness of the expense. 
 
 A further alternative is that Mr. Ellis simply made an error in his accounting for the costs associated with the trip. 
 
 When Mr. Makowecki, Mr. McLean and Mr. Deleeuw reimbursed Mr. Ellis he had an obligation to account to Barcol for the amounts he received. However, merely because he may have had an obligation to repay Barcol for a portion of the cost of the airfare does not make his conduct fraudulent. The Crown needs to prove intent beyond a reasonable doubt, and it has failed to do so.


















ii.



Oilers Suite Expense
 
 Barcol and Steelcraft leased a suite at Rogers Place for the purpose of entertaining customers and employees at events such as Oilers games.
 
 In October 2018 Mr. Ellis entertained several guests at one of the Oilers games. While at the game, he and his guests incurred expenses for meals in the amount of $2,603.14 plus GST. Mr. Ellis submitted a claim to Barcol and included this and other expenses for reimbursement. The total amount claimed was $4,612.85. The date of the expense report is October 18, 2018, however it is likely that this date is in error since one of the entries on the expense report is October 22, 2018, four days after the date of he expense report.
 
 The Steelcraft Controller during the relevant time was Gerald Telidetzki. He testified that a procedure had been set up so that the meal expenses incurred at the Oilers games were automatically paid for by the Steelcraft corporate credit card. However, the Steecraft or Barcol employee who was hosting guests at the suite would also receive a statement of the expenses incurred.
 
 Mr. Telidetzki testified that a cheque was produced by Barcol dated October 30, 2018 payable to Mr. Ellis in the amount of $4,612.85.
 
 The Crown argues that by submitting an expense claim in relation to a meal expense that was paid for by the Steelcraft credit card, Mr. Ellis’ conduct was fraudulent. I conclude that the Crown has failed to prove fraud beyond a reasonable doubt in relation to the Oilers suite expense. 
 
 While Mr. Telidetzki produced a cheque stub showing the payment to Mr. Ellis, there is no evidence that this cheque was ever cashed. The Crown has produced extensive RBC banking records which track all the deposits of the $1.7 million of investment funds that were received by Mr. Ellis. But those same records do not show any deposit in the amount of $4,612.85. It is possible that the Barcol cheque was negotiated in some other fashion. But this would be inconsistent with Mr. Ellis’ pattern of depositing all cheques in his RBC accounts. A finding of fraud cannot be made based on a possibility that Mr. Ellis used some other means of negotiating the Barcol cheque.
 
 I conclude that in relation to this expense claim, the Crown has failed to prove the deprivation element of fraud beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
 I find Mr. Ellis not guilty on Count 15.
c)

Count 24 – Impersonating a Police Officer
 
 On or shortly after September 10, 2018, Mr. Makowecki learned that Miller Thomson was not holding $33 million in trust for the Dynasty Project. This caused him substantial concern. As a result, he began to apply pressure on Mr. Ellis to deliver documentation relating to the Dynasty Project so that he could be satisfied of its legitimacy. 
 
 During these discussions Mr. Ellis reported to Mr. Makowecki that the Dynasty Project was on hold because Mr. Ellis’ brother and a banker were being investigated by the RCMP in relation to some potentially fraudulent activity involving funds related to the Dynasty Project. Mr. Ellis told Mr. Makowecki that he would be contacted by the RCMP to obtain information regarding the issue.
 
 The Agreed Statement of Facts proves that Mr. Ellis’ statements regarding RCMP investigation of Mr. Ellis’ brother and the banker are false. There never was such an investigation.
 
 On October 5, 2018 Mr. Makowecki received a text message a person identifying himself as Paul Desjardins. The person introduced himself in the following way:
Hello Boris. My name is Paul Desjardins and I am the lead investigator and handler for Nick Ellis. We will be formally reaching out to you early next (sic) to bring you up to speed. I can tell you that you have nothing to be worried about. Save this number and I will provide my details and additional information. Enjoy your weekend. Paul.
(emphasis added)
 
 Mr. Makowecki followed up with Mr. Desjardins by text message on multiple occasions but did not receive a substantive response until October 27, 2018 when he received another message from the same telephone number. That message said:
We are very aware Boris thank you. Just an FYI Nick had done everything we asked and the outcome will not be affected by the additional investigation. You both have nothing to worry about.
(emphasis added)
 
 After a few days Mr. Makowecki received another text message from the same number. That text message said:
Boris we have just executed 2 arrest warrants. Nick will be with you shortly he will have some details for you. You are cleared to meet with the lawyers on Friday before you depart. We understand this has not been easy but you both have been protected. It will all make sense!
 
 The exchange of text messages makes it clear that by early November 2019 Mr. Makowecki had serious reservations as to the legitimacy of Paul Desjardins and whether he was a police officer. On November 2, 2018 Mr. Makowecki sent a text to the number and asked for Paul Desjardins’s email address. The address was never provided.
 
 On November 5, 2018 Mr. Makowecki sent a further test which said:
Hi Paul … can I respectfully ask for your email address? And furthermore, can I ask who you work for? Thank you Paul, Boris.
 
 Paul responded on November 5, 2019 and said that some information would be coming in the next two days. This prompted Mr. Makowecki to send another text message:
Thanks Paul, but my question is who do you work for, please advise.
 
 Mr. Makowecki received a message in response, but the message contained none of the information requested. Therefore Mr. Makowecki sent two further text messages also on November 5, 2018:
Paul, you need to tell me who you work for … it’s not about patience. Every one is fuck’in with me and my capital. If someone doesn’t come out clean with me, I will be going to K-Division and the Alberta Securities Com … TODAY. Thank you.
Nick told me you’re an RCMP, I had you checked out and surprise, you are not. You would tell me who you are if you’re a legitimate investigator and would of come and seen me days ago. Paul, if you’re not identifying who you are, it’s ok … I’m doing my own thing to protect my investment. Regards, Boris Makowecki.
 
 The text messages continued but Mr. Makowecki received none of the substantive information that he asked for including Paul’s email address, his badge number or who he was working for. Ultimately after several delays, Mr. Makowecki left for his holiday in Mexico. On November 16, 2018 Paul provided further assurances and explained that if a meeting was required he would travel to Mexico to meet Mr. Makowecki. The text reads, in part:
… We will call you on Tuesday at a time chosen by you. The call will be to relay specifics about us and the investigation. Again the money is safe and accounted for fully. If an in person meeting is necessary I do have approval for Mexico.
(emphasis added)
 
 Arrangements were made for a meeting at a restaurant in Mexico but when Mr. Makowecki arrived, Paul was not there. While in the restaurant Mr. Makowecki received a text from Paul who explained that he was “watching someone watch you” and no meeting could take place until “we regroup”. Mr. Makowecki responded by text saying “This is crap” and that there was no one watching him. Mr. Makowecki sent a further text to Paul:
If you have people watching the guy watching me – question – what am I wearing?
 
 Paul responded by saying that “there are no games here boris we will be in touch”
 
 Mr. Makowecki never heard from Paul again.
 
 The Agreed Statement of Facts proves that Paul Desjardins is not employed with the RCMP and that the telephone number from which the texts came is not a telephone number belonging to the RCMP.
 
 In all of the circumstances I infer that Mr. Ellis, either alone or in concert with other persons, was responsible for communicating with Mr. Makowecki via text message while posing as Paul Desjardin. I make this inference based on:
•


the Agreed Statement of Facts; 
•


the fact that the messages began when Mr. Makowecki expressed concerns over the forged Miller Thomson letter; 
•


the fact that Mr. Makowecki was applying pressure to get documentation from Mr. Ellis; 
•


the content of the texts was designed to pacify Mr. Makowecki, e.g.: “you have nothing to worry about" and “the money is safe and fully accounted for”.
 
 There is no other explanation that could possibly explain someone else being behind the text messages.
 
 Despite this, I find that the Crown has failed to prove this offence beyond a reasonable doubt. The text messages do not represent that the sender is a peace officer. The text messages from Paul Desjardin do represent that the sender is an “investigator”. But nowhere in the text messages does the sender represent that he is a peace officer. It is certainly arguable that some of the content of the messages could possibly lead to the inference that the author was holding himself out to be a peace officer, i.e. references to badge numbers, arrest warrants and to meeting with the Crown. However, none of this was sufficient to permit Mr. Makowecki to believe that Paul was a peace officer. Quite the opposite. Mr. Makowecki asked very early on “who are you working for”. 
 
 In these circumstances I have reasonable doubt as to whether the sender of the text messages was holding himself out as a peace officer. To the contrary, he was doing everything necessary to avoid this. He did not say that he was RCMP and refused to provide information that would link them to the police.
 
 In all these circumstances I find Mr. Ellis not guilty on Count 24.
VIII.



Conclusion
 
 From February 2016 to March 2019, Mr. Ellis engaged in an elaborate scheme in which he presented several investment opportunities to eight of his friends, neighbours, and co-workers. The investment opportunities were interconnected, and several investors participated in more than one opportunity. 
 
 The evidence with respect to many of the elements on most of the counts was circumstantial, but the circumstantial evidence is overwhelming and in each case permits only one reasonable inference. 
 
 I have found that the investment opportunities presented by Mr. Ellis were a house of cards built on a foundation of deception. None of the investment opportunities were real and all were designed to simply extract substantial amounts of money from the complainants for the sole benefit of Mr. Ellis. 
 
 I find Mr. Ellis guilty on the following counts:
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/kb/2023abkb13.html
 



On May 31, 2022, a jury found Anthony Bilodeau guilty of second-degree murder in the death of Maurice Cardinal and guilty of manslaughter in the death of Jacob Sansom.
 



 Mr. Bilodeau will be sentenced to life imprisonment for his conviction on second-degree murder in the killing of Maurice Cardinal. This Court must determine the appropriate period of parole ineligibility between 10 and 25 years for Mr. Bilodeau pursuant to s 745.4 of the Criminal Code of Canada. Mr. Bilodeau used a firearm in the killing of Jacob Sansom and accordingly, must serve a minimum period of imprisonment of four years for manslaughter under s 236(a). This Court must determine the appropriate period of imprisonment for this offence which will be served concurrently with the life sentence for second-degree murder.
 



The Crown seeks a period of parole ineligibility for the second-degree murder conviction in the range of 15 years. It further seeks a concurrent sentence in the range of 12 to 15 years for the manslaughter conviction. The Crown also seeks ancillary Orders including a lifetime weapons prohibition pursuant to s 109 of the Criminal Code and a mandatory DNA Order pursuant to s 487.051.
 



The Defence argues that the appropriate period of parole ineligibility for the second-degree murder conviction is the statutorily mandated minimum period of 10 years and that the appropriate sentence for the manslaughter conviction is the statutorily mandated minimum period of incarceration of four years to be served concurrently with the mandatory life sentence for the second-degree murder conviction.
II. Background Facts
 



Jacob Sansom and Maurice Cardinal were out hunting near Glendon, Alberta on March 27, 2020. They killed a moose which they then took to a friend’s home where they skinned it and cut it into a number of parts which were then bagged for distribution to a number of families for food.
 



They left their friend’s home in the evening and began driving along Range Road 484. Mr. Sansom was driving, and Mr. Cardinal was in the passenger seat. Sometime around 9:30 PM, they stopped briefly at the entrance to the driveway of the home of Roger Bilodeau. They were seen by Roger Bilodeau who believed they were there for a nefarious purpose, such as scouting out the location for a possible later break-in and robbery.
 



Roger Bilodeau and his 16-year-old son exited the house and got into Mr. Bilodeau’s truck. They began chasing the Sansom vehicle and, over the course of about 7 km, reached speeds of up to 150 km/h.
 



During the pursuit, Roger Bilodeau contacted his son, Anthony Bilodeau, who lived nearby, and asked him to join the pursuit and to bring a gun. Anthony Bilodeau did so.
 



The Sansom vehicle arrived and stopped at the intersection of Range Road 484 and Township Road 622. Roger Bilodeau pulled his truck in front of the Sansom vehicle. Jacob Sansom exited his vehicle and began walking towards the Bilodeau vehicle. Roger Bilodeau then attempted to reverse his truck into Jacob Sansom.
 

 Anthony Bilodeau arrived at the intersection around 9:45 PM. As he exited his truck, Mr. Sansom began walking towards him. Anthony shot Mr. Sansom in the chest. The three Bilodeaus gathered briefly at or near Roger’s truck. Anthony then shot Maurice Cardinal three times. 
 

 The Bilodeaus then left the scene. They made no effort to contact anyone who could provide assistance to Jacob Sansom and Maurice Cardinal. They both died at the scene. Their bodies were discovered hours later, close to 4:00 AM on March 28, by a passerby who did call for assistance.
III. Range of Possible Sentences
 

 The purpose and principles of sentencing are set out in ss. 718, 718.1 and 718.2 of the Criminal Code of Canada. The fundamental purpose of sentencing is to have respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful, and safe society. When imposing sanctions, the Court should strive to achieve the objectives of denouncing unlawful conduct; deterring the offender and other persons from committing offences; separating offenders from society where necessary; assisting in rehabilitating offenders; providing reparations for harm done to victims or to the community and; promoting a sense of responsibility in offenders and acknowledgement of the harm done to victims and to the community. 
 

 There is one fundamental principle in sentencing: The sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender. The gravity of the offence is largely defined by the minimum and maximum sentences set out in the Criminal Code. Other sentencing principles include that of parity which mandates that a sentence should be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences in similar circumstances and that of totality which provides that where consecutive sentences are imposed, the combined sentence should not be unduly long or harsh. Importantly, it must always be borne in mind that sentencing is a highly individualized process and the Court must consider all relevant mitigating and aggravating circumstances as well as factors relating to the offender’s personal circumstances.
 

 Counsel have provided many case authorities on sentences imposed in cases of second-degree murder and cases of manslaughter. Applying the parity principle is difficult, however, as there are no cases presented which involve offenders similar to Anthony Bilodeau committing similar offences in similar circumstances. 
 

 Section 235 of the Criminal Code of Canada mandates a sentence of life imprisonment for second degree murder. Section 745.4 gives this court discretion to impose a period of parole ineligibility within a range of 10 to 25 years, having regard to the character of the offender, the nature of the offence, the circumstances surrounding its commission and the recommendation, if any, made by the jury. The jury in this case made no recommendation. 
 

 Section 236(a) provides that a person convicted of manslaughter where a firearm is used is liable to imprisonment for life and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of four years. The offence of manslaughter covers a wide range of cases. Different degrees of moral culpability fall along a continuum between cases classified as near accident at one extreme and near murder at the other. The sentencing court must determine the rung on the moral culpability ladder the offender reached when the unlawful act was committed. This is to ensure that the sentence imposed fits the degree of moral fault of the offender for the harm done: R v Laberge, 1995 ABCA 196 para 6.
 

 The Crown has provided authorities it says support a 15-year period of parole ineligibility for the second-degree murder conviction and a 12–15-year period of incarceration for the manslaughter conviction. The defence has provided authorities it says support a minimum 10-year period of parole ineligibility for the second-degree murder conviction and a 4-year period of incarceration for the manslaughter conviction, to be served concurrently.
IV. Anthony Bilodeau’s Actions
 

 Anthony Bilodeau’s involvement in the tragic shooting and killing of Maurice Cardinal and Jacob Sansom began with a phone call he received at home from his father, Roger Bilodeau. Roger was in his vehicle, with his 16-year-old son, and engaged in a high-speed pursuit of the Sansom vehicle initiated by him due to an unfounded and erroneous conclusion about the intentions of its occupants.
 

 The phone call to Anthony took place as Roger’s vehicle and the Sansom vehicle were heading north past Anthony’s home. Roger told Anthony that he was involved in a pursuit of “the thieves” and told Anthony to assist and to grab a gun.
 

 The pursuit continued until Jacob Sansom brought his vehicle to a stop at the intersection of Range Road 484 and Township Road 622. At that point, Roger Bilodeau pulled his truck in front of the Sansom truck, partially blocking the potential travel or escape route for the Sansom vehicle. Mr. Sansom exited his vehicle and began walking towards the Roger Bilodeau vehicle. Roger Bilodeau tried to back his vehicle into Mr. Sansom. Anthony Bilodeau showed up within a few minutes. He had brought a gun, as instructed.
 

 Anthony Bilodeau testified before the jury that he came upon the scene and saw Roger Bilodeau being assaulted by Jacob Sansom. He loaded his rifle. He then got out of his vehicle. He then racked his rifle and said “hey, that’s enough”. Jacob Sansom came towards him with his fists clenched and he saw Maurice Cardinal not far away with a shotgun. He testified that Jacob Sansom kept coming towards him and he was able to see that Maurice Cardinal’s shotgun was equipped with a magazine. As Jacob Sansom got closer, Anthony Bilodeau raised his gun, pointed it and shot Jacob Sansom in the chest. He said he believed he was going to be killed. Shortly thereafter, he saw Maurice Cardinal near the Sansom truck and then reaching in. He testified that he shot Maurice Cardinal because he thought Maurice Cardinal was reaching for a weapon and was going to shoot him. He stated that at all times he was acting in self-defence to protect himself, Roger Bilodeau and Joseph Bilodeau.

 

 The defence of self-defence was testified to by Anthony Bilodeau and forcefully argued by his counsel to the jury. Had the jury fully accepted the position of the defence, Anthony Bilodeau would have been acquitted of any offence in relation to the killing of Jacob Sansom. He was not acquitted but, rather, was convicted of manslaughter, a lesser included offence to the charge of second degree murder. In finding him guilty of manslaughter, the jury may have accepted that Mr. Bilodeau believed that force or the threat of force was being used against him or his family and that he was acting to defend or protect. The jury may then have determined, however, that his shooting of Mr. Sansom in the chest was an unreasonable use of force in the circumstances and not proportionate to the threat of force against him or his family. It is somewhat speculative to try and determine the avenue by which the jury reached its decision but regardless of which avenue was followed, the jury concluded that Anthony Bilodeau was guilty of manslaughter.
 

 The defence of self defence in relation to the shooting of Maurice Cardinal by Anthony Bilodeau was wholly rejected by the jury. The jury clearly rejected Mr. Bilodeau’s testimony that he saw Maurice Cardinal near the Sansom truck, then beside it and reaching in for what he believed to be a weapon and that he shot Maurice Cardinal because he thought Maurice Cardinal was going to shoot him. The jury was obviously satisfied that Mr. Bilodeau committed the unlawful act of shooting Maurice Cardinal causing his death and that he either meant to cause Mr. Cardinal’s death or he meant to cause him bodily harm that he knew was likely to cause his death. He was not acting in self-defence.
 

 Anthony Bilodeau shot Mr. Samson once, in the chest, within a few seconds of arriving at the scene. Mr. Bilodeau and the other two Bilodeaus then gathered briefly at Roger’s truck following which Mr. Bilodeau moved towards Mr. Cardinal. He shot Mr. Cardinal three times, at least one of which was in the back and possibly when Mr. Cardinal was already on the ground.
V. Aggravating and Mitigating Factors
Aggravating Factors
 

 Of course, the ways in which Anthony Bilodeau killed Jacob Sansom and Maurice Cardinal are aggravating in and of themselves. He brought a gun at the direction of his father without questioning its need or the full circumstances existing at the time. Within seconds of arriving at the scene of the incident, he loaded and racked his rifle and shot Jacob Sansom in the chest. After a brief pause, he shot Maurice Cardinal 3 times. Two innocent men, doing nothing more than celebrating a successful day of helping provide food to others, lay dead within minutes of his arrival.
 

 There are other aggravating factors to consider. Like his father, Mr. Bilodeau made no attempt to seek medical assistance for Mr. Sansom and Mr. Cardinal who were left to die alone on the road, in a ditch, at an isolated rural location. Concerned about the possibility of having been seen or being identified on a surveillance video, he drove to another location where he modified the appearance of his truck by removing the light bar from the front bumper which he then disposed of at a dump. He also cut up the gun that was used into multiple pieces using a plasma cutter and disposed of the pieces at a different dump. I do recognize that he ultimately did advise the RCMP what he had done and advised of the locations where he disposed of the evidence.



 Mitigating Factors
 

 Anthony Bilodeau is 34 years old and has been married to Michelle for over 10 years. They are the parents of a 10-year-old daughter. The Court has been provided with about 34 positive character references from family, including Michelle, his mother, grandparents, siblings, cousins, uncles, aunts and in-laws. References have also been provided by friends, community members and employers. Anthony has been described as reliable, trustworthy, caring, honest, kind, trusting and gentle. He is hard working and dependable. He has been a productive and significant contributing member of his immediate family, his extended family and the community as a whole. He has strong family and religious values. He has never exhibited violent or aggressive tendencies and has no criminal record. As the Crown has conceded, Anthony Bilodeau has led a pro-social life and was clearly a person of prior good character.
 

 Anthony Bilodeau has been in custody since March 31, 2020. For a significant portion of that time, he was housed at the Red Deer Remand Centre. He was clearly considered an exemplary inmate and is described by the Head of Programs at the Centre as “...a model inmate. He received no institutional charges or informal discipline...[H]e was an excellent unit cleaner who was polite and respectful to staff. He attended chapel services and met one on one with the centre Chaplain while at RDRC.” 
 

 Anthony Bilodeau is clearly remorseful and deeply regrets his involvement in the tragic events of March 27, 2020 and the deaths of Jacob Sansom and Maurice Cardinal. I have no doubt that he is an excellent candidate for rehabilitation.
 

 The defence introduced an expert report from Dr. Marc Nesca, a clinical forensic psychologist who completed a risk assessment analysis of Mr. Bilodeau and concluded that “violence in this case is linked to a set of exceptional circumstances, rather than reflecting engrained psychological traits, an empirically anchored analysis of risk failed to identify the presence of a single risk factor for future violence. These results necessarily identify Mr. Bilodeau as posing a Low Risk of violent recidivism.”
 

 I question the relevance of such a report and opinion at this sentencing stage. First, I have no doubt that a risk assessment performed on Mr. Bilodeau before the incident of March 27, 2020 would have resulted in the same opinion. That is, and notwithstanding that it may have been exceptional circumstances that conflated to cause Mr. Bilodeau’s response, it is highly unlikely that any risk assessment before the incident would have ever disclosed the risk that he would react in the way that he did. 
 

 Second, a risk assessment is more cogent and probative when considering whether Mr. Bilodeau is a good candidate for parole. It is the Parole Board of Canada that must consider a risk analysis in determining Mr. Bilodeau’s eligibility for parole at the expiration of his parole ineligibility period and to impose or vary conditions for release. That is, the Board must consider whether the offender would present an undue risk to society if granted parole: Corrections and Conditional Release Act, S.C. 1992, c. 20.
 

 The report and opinion submitted at this sentencing stage does not assist this Court as it does not impact on the consideration and application of the sentencing objectives and principles set out in the Criminal Code. While it may tangentially relate to the objective of rehabilitation, I have considered all of the other mitigating factors presented and as indicated above, I believe Mr. Bilodeau’s prospects for rehabilitation to be excellent.
 

 The defence has further submitted that this Court should consider both self-defence and provocation in assessing Mr. Bilodeau’s moral blameworthiness. There was no evidence led directly or specifically on the issue of provocation. The defence did not raise the question of provocation nor place it before the jury. The facts surrounding the killing of Maurice Cardinal belie any suggestion of provocation at the time he was shot. The jury rejected the defence of self-defence in relation to his killing. Its rejection of the defence of self-defence to the second-degree murder charge necessarily means a wholesale rejection of any facts that may have been seen as possibly supporting that defence. 
 

 Regarding the killing of Jacob Sansom, it is also clear that the jury did not accept the defence of self-defence as providing a complete defence or acquittal. Rather, the jury could have concluded that Anthony Bilodeau reacted with unreasonable or excessive force, thereby negating the defence. I have considered the possibility that Mr. Bilodeau initially believed he was acting in self-defence though, again, the defence was ultimately rejected by the jury.
VI. Victim Impact Statements
 

 The following is a summary of the victim impact statements given at the time of sentencing of Roger Bilodeau as set out at R v Bilodeau, 2022 ABQB 576 paras 39-43.
 

 Section 722 of the Criminal Code provides that for the purpose of determining the sentence to be imposed on an offender, the court shall consider victim impact statements describing the harm done to, or loss suffered by, the victim or victims of the offence.
 

 On March 27, 2020, Jacob Sansom was 39 years old. He was a husband, son, brother, father, nephew, and uncle. Maurice Cardinal was 57 years old. He was a father, step-father, grandfather, brother and uncle. Maurice was the uncle of Jacob. They were close.
 

 The Court heard a number of Victim Impact Statements from different family members. They spoke eloquently and passionately about Jacob Sansom and Maurice Cardinal as both important members of their families and as stalwarts of their community. They spoke of the grief and sorrow, heartbreak and loneliness suffered by all as a result of the loss of Mr. Sansom and Mr. Cardinal to their families. They all suffer from fear and anxiety and some from depression and PTSD. They spoke of the impact of both on all members of their families and extended families as educators and role models for their culture and their ways of life.
 

 Jacob Sansom and Maurice Cardinal were also pillars of their community. They supported not only their families but also the community at large by doing things like providing fresh meat for families in need. They were hunters and teachers for their families as well as their community. They were described as men who “honoured mother Earth” and were “knowledge keepers” of their culture. They inspired many.
 

 No sentence imposed by this Court can ever provide justice in the eyes of the victims’ families and friends for their devastating loss. No sentence can alleviate the heartbreak, pain and hurt suffered by all of the many members of the victims’ families and their friends.
VII. The Appropriate Sentence
 

 I will first address the fact that, despite having the opportunity, the jury made no recommendations regarding parole ineligibility. It has been held that the jury is, therefore, deemed to have recommended the 10 year minimum: R v Osei-Agyemang, 2011 ABCA 2 para 14.
 

 Regardless of whether the jury recommendation is deemed to be the minimum or the members of the jury do make recommendations, it is the function of the sentencing judge alone to consider all factors relevant to sentencing in order to arrive at the appropriate period of parole ineligibility. In doing so, the sentencing judge may consider the recommendations of the jury but it must be emphasized that jury recommendations, deemed or not, are made with no training, experience or knowledge as to the factors to consider and how to apply the principles and objectives mandated by the Criminal Code of Canada and relevant jurisprudence. Only the sentencing judge has this ability.
 

 In arriving at the applicable period of parole ineligibility, I have considered the character of Anthony Bilodeau, the nature of the offences of second-degree murder and manslaughter committed by Mr. Bilodeau and the circumstances surrounding the commission of these offences. I have also considered the authorities provided to me by counsel as well as the objectives and principles of sentencing as set out in the Criminal Code of Canada. 
 

 I pause for a moment to emphasize that the determination of the period of parole ineligibility on the life sentence for second-degree murder means only that Mr. Bilodeau will have the right to apply for parole at the expiration of that period. It does not mean that he is entitled to be granted parole or that he will get it. That is to be determined by the Parole Board which will assess Mr. Bilodeau’s risk at that time and, if to be released, the terms and conditions of release it deems appropriate. Importantly, and regardless of the Parole Board’s decision, Mr. Bilodeau will serve a life sentence.
 

 The actions of Anthony Bilodeau and Roger Bilodeau on March 27, 2020 had tragic consequences: the deaths of two innocent men, Jacob Sansom and Maurice Cardinal. While those tragic consequences cannot unduly distort determination of the appropriate penalty, they must still be taken into account in considering the proportionality of the sentence and the need to satisfy the objectives of denunciation and deterrence.
 

 While Anthony Bilodeau is an excellent candidate for rehabilitation, and rehabilitation is still an important objective to strive for, its importance in cases such as this is subordinate to the objectives of denunciation and deterrence. Anthony Bilodeau’s unlawful conduct and the harm done must be denounced in strong terms. As well, and while I am confident that Mr. Bilodeau is adequately deterred from committing any offences in the future, it is important that other persons be deterred from committing offences.
 

 In relation to the killing of Jacob Sansom and considering all of the circumstances and factors outlined above, I believe that Anthony Bilodeau’s moral blameworthiness places him on a rung at the lower end of the highest Laberge category.
 

 A fit and proper sentence to impose upon Anthony Bilodeau for committing the offence of second-degree murder of Maurice Cardinal is life imprisonment with parole ineligibility set at 13 years. A fit and proper sentence to impose upon Anthony Bilodeau for committing the offence of manslaughter in the death of Jacob Sansom is 8 years, to be served concurrently with the sentence for the second-degree murder. Setting the parole ineligibility period at 13 years reflects consideration of the relevant principles and objectives of sentencing while recognizing that 2 innocent men were killed.
VIII. Credit for Pre-Sentence Custody
 

 Anthony Bilodeau has been in custody since March 31, 2020. As he has been convicted of second-degree murder and sentenced to life imprisonment, he will receive credit for the time he has spent in custody pursuant to s 746 of the Code. He is not entitled to any enhanced credit due to the conditions in remand, COVID restrictions or any other factor.
XI. Conclusion
 

 Anthony Bilodeau is sentenced to life imprisonment for second-degree murder in the death of Maurice Cardinal and must serve a period of incarceration of 13 years before he is eligible for parole.
 

 Anthony Bilodeau is sentenced to a period of 8 years incarceration for manslaughter in the death of Jacob Sansom, to be served concurrently to his sentence of life imprisonment. 
 

 Anthony Bilodeau is prohibited from possessing any firearm pursuant to s 109 of the Criminal Code of Canada and must provide a sample of bodily substance reasonably required for the purposes of forensic DNA analysis pursuant to s 487.01.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/pc/2023abpc16.html
 
 This is a case of alleged intimate partner violence. Jesus Menjivar-Rios is charged with offences contrary to sections 267(a), 267(c), 266, 264.1(1)(a), and 430(4) of the Criminal Code.
 
 The complainant communicated through independent counsel that she “no longer wishes to proceed with this matter” and wanted “the prosecution to end.” Accordingly, the Crown did not subpoena her, relying instead upon out-of-court statements that she made during and immediately following the alleged assault.
 
 Do these statements fit within the res gestae exception to the hearsay rule?
 
Voir Dire Facts
 
 On January 11, 2022, Caleb Korop was living in the basement of his sister Raven Lang’s home. He heard “banging and thumping” upstairs as his sister’s boyfriend (accused) “berated” her. His “frantic” sounding sister then yelled: “stop hitting me” and “Caleb, call the police.” 
 
 Caleb Korop called 911.
 
 The 911 call is ten minutes long. At the start of the call Mr. Korop is in the basement and as he speaks screaming is heard from upstairs. Three minutes later (after the accused leaves) Mr. Korop goes upstairs and hands the phone to his sister. He notices that she looks “distressed,” her cell phone is “smashed,” and the house is in a state of disarray.
 
 Ms. Lang then details the alleged assault to the 911 operator, including that the accused strangled her. She speaks in a consistently excited and emotional tone, crying throughout. 
 
 The 911 call ends as RCMP Constable Dunphy arrives at the residence. He notes Ms. Lang to be very “upset and distraught,” she has red markings on her neck, and he sees that various items have been thrown around the house and/or damaged.
 
 The Crown seeks to tender for their truth Raven Lang’s out-of-court statements overheard by Caleb Korob (paragraph 4 above) and as made to the 911 operator (exhibit 1).
 
Res Gestae
 
The res gestae exception to the hearsay rule “captures statements made with such excitement or spontaneity that the possibility of fabrication or concoction can be disregarded”: R v Lugela, 2020 ABCA 348 at para 34.
 
First, precise contemporaneity is not required. Rather, to “avoid the prospect of fabrication, the statement should be reasonably contemporaneous with the alleged occurrence”: R v Sylvain, 2014 ABCA 153 at para 31 (Sylvain). 
 
Second, the critical question is whether the stress or pressure created by the event in question is ongoing, such that the statement(s) is made before there is time to contrive or concoct: R v DLD, 2014 ABCA 218 at para 16 (DLD). 
 
Third, R v Villeda, 2011 ABCA 85 is instructive. In that case the 911 call occurred shortly after the complainant’s boyfriend (accused) left the residence. The Court of Appeal held that “although it was not possible to tell with precision how soon after the assault the 911 call was placed,” it was made “shortly after the assault” and thus was “sufficiently contemporaneous to amount to a spontaneous outburst which could not have been concocted” (at para 22).
 
Fourth, all the circumstances (the statement itself and any extrinsic evidence) must be considered, including the “content” and “timing ... of a 911 call” in determining whether the recording properly falls within the “excited utterances” category: Sylvain at para 32.
 
Fifth, exhibit 1 is an accurate recording capturing the entire statement. Therefore, Raven Lang’s emotional state is “readily demonstrated” by the call itself: DLD at para 19. 
 
Turning to the facts, I note the following. 
 
The 911 call starts while the alleged assault is ongoing and ends very shortly after the accused is apprehended by police driving away from the residence. And Caleb Korop recognizes and identifies the accused and complainant’s voices (from exhibit 1) as heard during the first three minutes of yelling and screaming from the upstairs of the home. 
 
As the complainant speaks to the 911 operator, very few questions are asked. She is the primary speaker. She describes a stressful and serious event that has just occurred. She sounds distraught. Her excited and emotional tone (speaking quickly, without pause or apparent deliberation, while crying, and attempting to catch her breath) is consistent throughout.
 
When Constable Dunphy arrives Ms. Lang is still on the phone with 911. She is still in an excited state. Her cell phone is destroyed, various items have been thrown around and/or damaged, she exhibits no indicia of impairment, and her neck is red. 
 
All the “facts and circumstances go on the scale in assessing ... the shocking event and spontaneity of the 911 call”: Sylvain at para 38. The timing, tone, and content of the call itself, along with the observations made by both Caleb Korop and Constable Dunphy, all markedly tip the scale in favour of admission of the excited utterances for their truth.
 
Finally, the defence called the lawyer who provided advice to Ms. Lang, and led evidence that she has a sad history of self-harm and may be accident-prone. Beyond confirming that Ms. Lang has recanted (or claims to have forgotten or exaggerated) what she told police, this evidence was otherwise unhelpful in regard to the hearsay issues explored in this voir dire.
 
Necessity
 
The excited utterances exception to the hearsay rule does not contain a necessity requirement. Necessity is rooted in the best evidence rule, whereas res gestae is admissible because the out-of-court statement is generally better than the potential in-court evidence: Sylvain at para 33; Wigmore on Evidence, vol. 5 (Chadbourn rev. 1974) at p 253. 
 
Conclusion
 
Raven Lang’s out-of-court statements are admissible for the truth of their contents.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/pc/2023abpc3.html
 



Laron Damo Wall (Wall) pled guilty to one count of luring contrary to s 172.1(1)(a) Criminal Code of Canada (CC) with a date range of between April 1, and May 23, 2022.
 



The matter was adjourned for preparation of a Pre-Sentence Report (PSR). 
 



The facts relied on for this plea are as follows:
a)

JS is the complainant. AJ is JS’s sister. AJ had been dating Wall since early 2022. JS met Wall through her sister AJ. 
b)

In addition to face-to-face communications, Wall and JS began to communicate using online social media platforms such as Snapchat and Instagram.
c)

On April 1, 2022 Wall sent a Snapchat message to JS asking her what she was doing. She responded that she had just finished showering. Wall asked her to send him a picture. 
d)

JS believed Wall wanted a nude photo but sent a photo of her face.
e)

On one occasion Wall sent a shirtless image of himself wearing a towel around his waist and asked JS to send him a picture “like this”.
f)

 JS told Wall she did not want to send pictures like that.
g)

During the months of April and May, Wall made requests for nude images. Eventually JS relented and sent two images of her exposed breasts via Snapchat. JS observed the Snapchat application display a notification that Wall had saved a copy of those images.
h)

JS never sent any additional pictures.
i)

 Wall also sent messages of a sexual nature, encouraging JS to meet up with him for sexual contact. These communications continued until May 24, 2022.
j)

 On May 25, 2022, prior to any criminal investigation, Wall attended West Division detachment of the Edmonton Police Service (EPS). He sought advice from the police and requested assistance in deleting the photographs. 
 
II.




 The Accused’s Personal Antecedents
 



Wall was 22 years old at the time of the index offence, he is now 23. He appears before the Court with no prior criminal record and has complied with all conditions of his current release order.
 



Wall’s biological father was absent from his life. At two years old, Wall’s biological mother sent Wall and his sister to Barbados to live with extended family. During his four years in Barbados, Wall and his sister were physically and sexually abused. 
 



Upon returning to Canada at the age of six, Wall went to live with Mr. and Mrs. Wall, a foster family, who eventually adopted Wall. Wall considers Mr. and Mrs. Wall to be his mother and father. Between the ages of six and 12 Wall remembers little, aside from going back and forth between his biological mother and adoptive family and that he was homeschooled by Mrs. Wall during those years. 
 



Wall recalls some fond memories of his childhood, but also some negative ones. Wall described his family as being a “very” religious family, and his brother, Michael confirmed that they were raised in a “strict” home. 
 
 



As stated on page three of the PSR: 
When the subject was 15 years old, he stated he shared his first kiss with a female from his school. As a result of this, he advised Mrs. Wall made him return to home schooling. The subject explained the Wall family followed religious beliefs that forbid any sexual activity with the opposite sex until the age of 18. Further consequences imposed included him being “pulled” from his youth group and extracurricular activities. [Wall] stated this continued until the age of 17, when he was allowed to resume attending in-person classes. The subject stated soon after his return to school, he shared another kiss with a female classmate, and was made to return to home schooling again. The subject described this period of his life as becoming increasingly tumultuous, he expressed his belief that the relationship he had with Mrs. Wall was “toxic”, and he acknowledged he was struggling with anger; which he felt to be a result of him not processing previous abuse. The subject stated due to this, he was sent to Haulsville, Texas to attend a Christian based therapeutic program called Heartlight Boarding School. The subject stated that he was under the impression he was only to stay there for six months, but he ended up staying there until the age of 19. The subject reported he completed the program and felt like his life was in a better place.
 



Wall graduated Grade 12 from Heartlight Boarding School in Texas. Throughout elementary and high school Wall was both home-schooled and attended Christian Academy Schools. Wall explained that he excelled academically as he was made to achieve high grades, or he would face consequences such as not being allowed to play sports. Wall denied ever being reprimanded in school. With respect to future educational goals Wall would like to attend university for a business program. The PSR author confirmed this information through several collateral contacts. 
 

 Upon returning to Canada, Wall met his former girlfriend, Danea Hauser; after six months of dating, she became pregnant. At the age of 22, he and Ms. Hauser had a son. He advised that the two mutually decided to end their relationship shortly after their son’s birth although for a time they continued residing together and co-parenting. Currently, Wall rents a room in Edmonton, has an amicable relationship with Ms. Hauser (as evidenced by her letter of support entered as Exhibit S3), and remains a part of his son’s life. This information was confirmed by Ms. Hauser. 
 

 Since graduating high school Wall has primarily worked construction jobs. He was employed as a heavy equipment operator but was recently laid off. He is currently receiving Employment Insurance and is waiting for the outcome of his court matters before returning to work. 
 

 Wall advised the author of the PSR that while attending Heartlight Boarding School he was diagnosed with Oppositional Defiant Disorder (ODD) and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), although the author of the PSR could not confirm this information. 
 

 Wall confirmed that he has never used alcohol, has tried cannabis approximately five times but has never developed an addiction to it, has never experimented with any other substances, and is “totally against” substance use. This information was corroborated through Wall’s brother Michael, and Wall’s former partner, Ms. Hauser. 
 
III.



 Positions of the Parties
 

 The Crown proceeded by indictment. The maximum sentence is 14 years’ jail. The mandatory minimum was struck down as unconstitutional in the cases of: R v Melrose 2021 ABQB 73 (Melrose) and R v Jissink 2021 ABQB 102 (Jissink). 
 

 The Crown is seeking a period of incarceration of between 18 and 24 months, followed by 24 months’ probation.
 

 Defence is seeking a Conditional Sentence Order (CSO) of two years followed by 24 months’ probation.
 
IV.



 Sentencing Principles
a.

Sentencing Objectives
 

 The CC says that the fundamental purpose of sentencing is to “...contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions that have one or more...” of the objectives set out in s 718 CC. Those objectives are denunciation, deterrence, rehabilitation, reparation, to promote a sense of responsibility in the offender and acknowledgment of harm done, and to separate the offender, bearing in mind that s 718.2 (d) and (e) CC states that one should not be deprived of liberty, if less restrictive sanctions are appropriate.
 

 Section 718.01 CC also mandates that when a Court imposes a sentence for an offence that involved the abuse of a person under the age of 18, then the Court shall give primary consideration to denunciation and deterrence. 
 

 Although, generally speaking, no one sentencing objective trumps another, as stated by the Supreme Court of Canada (SCC) in R v Friesen 2020 SCC 9 (Friesen) at para 104: 
Where Parliament has indicated which sentencing objectives are to receive priority in certain cases, the sentencing judge’s discretion is thereby limited, such that it is no longer open to the judge to elevate other sentencing objectives to an equal or higher priority (Rayo, at paras. 103 and 107-8). However, while s. 718.01 requires that deterrence and denunciation have priority, nonetheless, the sentencing judge retains discretion to accord significant weight to other factors (including rehabilitation and Gladue factors) in exercising discretion in arriving at a fit sentence, in accordance with the overall principles of proportionality. [See also: R v Shrivastava 2019 ABQB 663 at para. 91 (Shrivastava); Melrose at paras 48-49].
 

 Denunciation has been defined as the “communication of society's condemnation of the offender's conduct.” (R v Proulx, 2000 SCC 5 (Proulx), at para 102). The Court in Proulx continued, stating:
In M. (C.A.), supra, at para. 81, I wrote:
In short, a sentence with a denunciatory element represents a symbolic, collective statement that the offender’s conduct should be punished for encroaching on our society’s basic code of values as enshrined within our substantive criminal law. As Lord Justice Lawton stated in R. v. Sargeant (1974), 60 Cr. App. R. 74, at p. 77: “society, through the courts, must show its abhorrence of particular types of crime, and the only way in which the courts can show this is by the sentences they pass.” (Proulx, para. 102).
 

 Deterrence refers to both specific and general deterrence. Specific deterrence looks at the need to deter the individual offender being sentenced; general deterrence is intended to send a message to the general public that such an offence will not go unpunished. 
 

 Given JS’s age, s 718.01 is triggered. Denunciation and deterrence are paramount sentencing objectives when sentencing Wall.
b.

Proportionality
 

 Proportionality is the “cardinal principle” of sentencing: R v Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64 (Lacasse) at para 12.
 

 Pursuant to s 718.1 CC, the sentence to be imposed must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender. The Court in Friesen specifically addressed the proportionality assessment as it relates to sexual offences against children. At para 75 the Court stated:
...[C]ourts need to take into account the wrongfulness and harmfulness of sexual offences against children when applying the proportionality principle. Accurately understanding both factors is key to imposing a proportionate sentence. The wrongfulness and the harmfulness impact both the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.
 

 When considering gravity in the proportionality analysis, “courts must recognize and give effect to (1) the inherent wrongfulness of these offences; (2) the potential harm to children that flows from these offences; and (3) the actual harm that children suffer as a result of these offences.” (Friesen, at para 76).
 

 Justice Moldaver in R v Morrison 2019 SCC 15 (Morrison) at paras 39-40 commented: 
Parliament created [the ‘luring’] offence to combat the very real threat posed by adult predators who attempt to groom or lure children by electronic means. As this Court explained in Levigne, the offence seeks to protect children by “identify[ing] and apprehend[ing] predatory adults who, generally for illicit sexual purposes, troll the Internet to attract and entice vulnerable children and adolescents”: para. 24.
 
To achieve this purpose, s. 172.1 criminalizes conduct that precedes the commission, or even the attempted commission, of certain designated offences, most of which involve sexual exploitation of children. It thereby creates an essentially inchoate offence — that is, a preparatory crime that captures conduct intended to culminate in the commission of a completed offence: see Legare, at para. 25; R. v. Alicandro, 2009 ONCA 133, 95 O.R. (3d) 173, at para. 20, citing A. Ashworth, Principles of Criminal Law, (5th ed. 2006), at pp. 468-70. There is no requirement that the accused meet or even intend to meet with the other person with a view to committing any of the designated offences: see Legare, at para. 25. The offence reflects Parliament’s desire to “close the cyberspace door before the predator gets in to prey”: para. 25. 
 

 Friesen sent a strong message that sexual offences against children are violent crimes that wrongfully exploit children’s vulnerabilities and cause profound harm. The harm flowing from these offences is not limited to the victim upon whom the offence was committed. These offences have a ripple effect, with the harm extending to the child’s parents, caregivers, and family members. There is also the harm that results from the financial, personal, and emotional costs of helping the victim recover (Friesen, at paras 62-63).
 

 I find it important to mention that Friesen reiterated that a child under the age of 16 lacks the capacity to consent and any participation in such activity is not a mitigating factor and should never be equated to consent (at para 52). (See also: Melrose at para 190). 
 

 In assessing moral blameworthiness, Renke, J. in R v Misay, 2021 ABQB 485 (Misay) emphasized at para 48, “that sexual offences against children are wrong in themselves, regardless of consequences threatened or actualized.” As stated in Friesen at para 90: “[t]he fact that the victim is a child increases the offender’s degree of responsibility. ... the intentional sexual exploitation and objectification of children is highly morally blameworthy because children are so vulnerable.”
 

 While sentences for these crimes must increase to reflect both Parliament’s sentencing initiatives and society’s deepened understanding of the wrongfulness and harmfulness of sexual violence against children, the Court in Friesen also stated at para 91: 
These comments should not be taken as a direction to disregard relevant factors that may reduce the offender’s moral culpability. The proportionality principle requires that the punishment imposed be “just and appropriate . . ., and nothing more” (M. (C.A.), at para. 80 (emphasis deleted); see also Ipeelee, at para. 37). First, as sexual assault and sexual interference are broadly-defined offences that embrace a wide spectrum of conduct, the offender’s conduct will be less morally blameworthy in some cases than in others. Second, the personal circumstances of offenders can have a mitigating effect.
V.




 Application of Principles to this Case
 

 In addressing proportionality, any sexual offence against a child is serious, and this offence is no exception. This offence exploited JS’s vulnerabilities. Although no Victim Impact Statements were filed, I nonetheless accept that the harm that flows from this offence does not end with JS but extends to her family, and her relationships with others. Further, although Wall entered a guilty plea to one offence of luring contrary to s 172.1 CC, this was not a spontaneous one-time incident; despite being rebuffed by JS, Wall continued to communicate with JS. He repeatedly asked her to provide him with nude photographs of herself, until she succumbed to his duress. He also repeatedly communicated with JS to meet up with him for sexual contact. His contact with JS continued from April 1, 2022 until May 24, 2022.
 

 Although there was no physical contact between JS and Wall, which would have been considered an aggravating factor had it occurred, child luring is an inchoate offence. Parliament’s intent was to criminalize telecommunications with a child when the intent of the communications was to pervert the child’s mind and entice the child to engage in what would otherwise be a specified secondary offence.
 

 However, the facts of this case can be distinguished from those referenced in Morrison. In Morrison the Court cited R v Levigne, 2010 SCC 25 (Levigne) suggesting that this offence seeks to protect children by “identify[ing] and apprehend[ing] predatory adults who, generally for illicit sexual purposes, troll the Internet to attract and entice vulnerable children and adolescents.” (Morrison at para 40 citing Levigne at para 24).
 

 Prior to engaging in any online communications, Wall and JS knew each other. This was not a situation where Wall was trolling the Internet attempting to engage with random, vulnerable children and adolescents for illicit sexual purposes. While this does not diminish the seriousness of the offence and the profound harm flowing from it, it nevertheless provides context.
 

 Mental health issues can be considered as mitigating in assessing an offender’s moral culpability: R v Deren, 2021 ABPC 84 at paras 36-41(Deren); R v Belcourt, 2010 ABCA 319 at para 8 (Belcourt); Melrose at para 23.
 

 Wall advised the author of the PSR that while attending Heartlight Boarding School he was diagnosed with ODD and ADHD. This was not confirmed by the PSR author, nor was any psychological assessment tendered during sentencing. 
 

 Without a psychological assessment or confirmation of a formal diagnosis, it is difficult to determine what, if any, weight should be given to any undiagnosed mental health considerations. 
 

 However, even without a psychological assessment or mental health diagnosis, a traumatic and painful childhood involving physical, emotional, and sexual abuse are appropriate factors to consider in mitigation: Shrivastava, paras 83-84.
 

 As a child, Wall disclosed to his adoptive parents the sexual abuse he had endured while living in Barbados. To deal with his trauma, Wall attended counselling consistently throughout his childhood; he advised that he attended counselling weekly until he was 19, and now attends occasionally as needed. 
 

 Though Wall is not Indigenous, he presents with many of the same considerations that are commonly referred to as Gladue factors (R v Gladue, 1999 CanLII 679 (SCC), 1 SCR 688), and the same considerations that the Court in Shrivastava deemed relevant mitigating factors: he experienced a traumatic childhood that was marked by family dysfunction, he was separated from his family at a young age, and he was the victim of both physical and sexual abuse. I have no difficulty in accepting that these factors lessen Wall’s moral culpability to some degree.
 

 To summarize, s 718.01 CC requires that denunciation and deterrence are the primary sentencing objectives. However, as stated in Friesen at para 104, the sentencing judge retains discretion to accord significant weight to other relevant factors when arriving at a proportionate sentence.
 

 Child luring is a serious crime that wrongfully exploits children’s vulnerabilities and causes profound harm to not only the child, but the child’s family and communities. Despite that all child luring is serious, I must also contextualize the circumstances of the offence, noting that it differs from the target offenders mentioned in Morrison. 
 

 Aggravating factors that were assessed within the proportionality analysis included the fact that this was not a spontaneous, one-time communication but lasted over several weeks, and Wall eventually succeeded in obtaining nude photos of JS.
 

 Factors considered in reducing Wall’s moral culpability were his unstable and traumatic childhood and abuse that he suffered.
 

 Considering all these factors, I find the offence was serious, but not to the same degree of seriousness as referenced in Morrison. Regarding moral culpability, given Wall’s personal antecedents I find it falls somewhere between the mid and high range on the moral blameworthiness scale. 
 

 Aside from those aggravating factors that I have considered in the proportionality analysis, I have not identified any further aggravating factors. 
 

 As for mitigating factors not contemplated in the proportionality analysis, I find the circumstances of this case exceptional. Wall attended the police station seeking their advice prior to any investigation or report made against him. He advised police he had inappropriate online communications, and inappropriate photographs of the victim. He asked the police to delete the photographs. From submissions made by counsel I was left to believe that Wall’s involvement with the police was not a pre-emptive maneuver in anticipation of a complaint from the victim. But for Wall’s self-disclosure, this matter would not be before the Court. As such, I find Wall’s actions to be a clear indication of remorse and accepting responsibility. 
 

 Wall was cooperative throughout the police investigation, he entered a guilty plea at the earliest opportunity, he is a youthful offender with no prior criminal record, he has complied with all release conditions, and he has a supportive family. 
 
VI.



 Parity 
a.

Starting Point Sentences
 

 As conceded in the Crown’s sentencing materials, Friesen has declined to establish a national starting point for any child exploitation offence (para 106). Nevertheless, Friesen made it clear that sentences for sexual offences against children must increase. (Friesen at para 101).
 

 Friesen also reminded us at para 37 that:
...[S]entencing ranges and starting points are guidelines, not hard and fast rules (R v M (T.E.), 1997 CanLII 389 (SCC), [1997] 1 S.C.R. 948 (S.C.C.), at para. 33; R v Wells, 2000 SCC 10, [2000] 1 S.C.R. 207 (S.C.C.), at para. 45; R v Nasogaluak, 2010 SCC 6, [2010] 1 S.C.R. 206 (S.C.C.), at para. 44; Lacasse, at para. 60). ... Ranges of sentences and starting points cannot be binding in either theory or practice, and appellate courts cannot interpret or apply the standard of review to enforce them, ...” [Emphasis added].
 

 Counsel provided several cases in their sentencing materials. Some of the cases included were for the purpose of highlighting sentencing principles, and several of these cases have already been referred to in this judgment. Other cases provided were for comparative purposes. While cases provided for parity may provide some assistance in determining a fit range, it is trite to say that no two cases are identical, and a sentencing range does not create a minimum starting point nor a maximum sentence – it is simply a range to assist in determining a fit and proportionate sentence. 
 
b.

Case Law – Sentencing Principles
 

 The following are cases referred to by counsel in their written materials, in support of the following sentencing principles:
a.

 Sentences for sexual violence against children need to increase: Friesen, at paras 5, 101, 109); R v Lemay 2020 ABCA 365 (Lemay) at paras 43-51.
b.

Sexual offences against children, including luring, are serious offences that favor incarceration absent exceptional circumstances: Jissink at para 71; Misay, at para 52.
c.

 Courts should be cautious about relying on dated precedents that fail to reflect society’s current awareness of the impact of sexual abuse on children, and past precedents must not be seen as imposing a cap on sentences. (Friesen, at para 110).
 
c.

 Case Law – Parity Principle
 

 Below is a summary of the cases provided for comparative purposes.
 

 Relevant Alberta cases that post-date Friesen:
a.


 Lemay
Facts: 
•


35-year-old accused (AC) started texting with a 15-year-old girl complainant (CO) and sent her pictures of his genitals. He pressured her to do the same, which she did. He sent her videos of himself masturbating while viewing her intimate images. 
•


They met five times for sexual activity over a four-month period. 
•


AC pled guilty to sexual interference and luring. 




Sentence Imposed: 
•


The 42 months jail plus two years’ probation was overturned by Court of Appeal. They substituted a sentence of 5.5 years (four years for sexual interference and 18 months consecutive for luring). 
 
b.


Misay 
Facts: 
•


38-year-old AC engaged in sexually explicit communications over text messages with undercover officer posing as 15-year-old girl. He sent her a photo of his genitals. He discussed the sexual activity he planned to engage in when he met the girl. They made plans to meet at a hotel for sexual activity. He was arrested at the hotel. 
•


AC had previously been warned by police not to engage in sexual contact with minors. 
•


AC pled guilty to luring contrary to s 172.1(1)(b). 
 Sentence Imposed: 
•


15 months jail plus two years’ probation. 
 
 
 
 
c.


 R v Boucher, 2020 ABCA 208(Boucher)
Facts: 
•


The Crown appealed an eight-year global sentence imposed on the respondent (AC) following his guilty pleas to sexual interference with a person under the age of 16 (six years’ incarceration), making child pornography (one year consecutive) and luring a child under the age of 16 (one year consecutive). 
•


 The AC committed more than 90 major sexual assaults on a 14-year-old child who viewed him as a father figure, over a period of approximately seven months. His abuse included luring the complainant via text messages to facilitate interfering with her in a sexual manner and creating pornographic images and videos of their sexual activities. The AC pled guilty to all of the charges against him on the first day of trial. 
Sentence Imposed: 
•


The eight-year global sentence was upheld on appeal. 
 
d.


R v EF, 2021 ABQB 639(EF)
 Facts: 
•


AC is CO’s father. The AC was 48 and the CO was 14 at the time of the offence. AC pinned CO’s hands above her head as she was lying on her back on a couch in AC’s living room. AC lifted up CO’s shirt with his free hand.  CO was not wearing a bra. AC touched CO’s breasts and squeezed her nipples. The touching took about a minute. The touching was for a sexual purpose. AC was charged and convicted of one count of s 151 CC. 
Sentence Imposed: 
•


24 months’ imprisonment less four months’ credit for a total sentence of 20 months’ imprisonment for the sexual interference with CO. 
 
e.


 R v DCH, 2020 ABQB 510(DCH)
 Facts: 
•


AC entered guilty pleas to the following charges: invitation to sexual touching contrary to s 152 CC, making child pornography contrary to s.163.1(2) CC, and accessing child pornography contrary to s.163.1(4.1) CC. 
•


AC showed pornographic videos to his four-year-old piano student, the CO. The Internet browsing history and metadata recovered from the phone showed that AC had used the phone to browse the Internet for child pornography videos, images, and stories. AC had accessed approximately 1,356 images and videos of child pornography and he had downloaded some child pornography into hidden folders. 
•


A risk assessment had been prepared and the psychiatrist assessed the AC’s risk for further accessing of child pornography to be moderate to high and his risk for relapse into non-contact and contact sexual offences to be moderate.
 Sentence Imposed: 
•


The global sentence imposed was 4.5 years’ incarceration – s 152 CC (two years), s 163.1(2) CC (one year consecutive) and s 163.1(4.1) CC (1.5 years consecutive).
 
f.

 Deren
Facts: 
•


AC pled guilty to s 172.1(1)(b) for messages exchanged with his 13-year-old niece, particularly a text exchange where the AC was telling the CO that her mother thought the two of them should engage in intercourse so the CO could try it. The CO showed the text messages to her mother and the police investigation followed. AC brought a s 12 challenge to the six-month mandatory minimum sentence (MMS). 
•


AC had severe cognitive deficits, was supported by Assured Income for the Severely Handicapped (AISH), maintained independent living with extensive supports, and had no prior record. Expert opinion accepted by the Court found AC to be to be a very low risk to reoffend. 
Sentenced Imposed:
•


Six-month CSO plus two years’ probation. 
 
g.

Jissink
Facts: 
•


43-year-old male AC (high school teacher) pled guilty to luring under 
s 172.1(1)(a). The CO (16 years old) was student at the AC’s high school, although not in his classroom. AC sent two messages to the CO via Snapchat. Both messages contained an image of AC with captions that said “You’re hot” and “LOL, I wanna fuck you”. No physical contact occurred. 
•


Aggravating factors included: statutory aggravating factor of a breach of trust, age difference, the likelihood of risk of harm to complainant, and the AC’s behaviour communicating inappropriately via Snapchat with three other students. 
•


Mitigating factors included: AC’s guilty plea, AC’s remorse (evidenced by guilty plea and psychological assessment which commented on AC’s increasing awareness of his inappropriate and criminal conduct) and had support from family, employer and community. 
Sentence Imposed: 
•


One year incarceration followed by two years of probation. 
 
h.

Melrose
Facts: 
•


27-year-old AC pled guilty to sexual interference pursuant to s 151 of the CC and child luring pursuant to s 172.1(1)(b). The AC and the 13-year-old CO had sexual intercourse once. The AC suffered from a significant cognitive impairment which resulted in his mental age falling between 8.5 to 11 years old. The Court found, while the CO did not have the capacity to consent due to her age, this was a “relationship of genuine affection”. 
•


AC had no criminal record, cooperated with authorities (confessed to police and entered early guilty plea), displayed remorseful conduct by attending counselling and accepting Guardianship and Trusteeship and had strong family and community support. 
•


Defence challenged mandatory minimum under s 172.1(2)(a) which prescribed a minimum sentence of one year imprisonment for an offence under s 172.1(1)(b). 
Sentencing Principles: 
•


Psycho-social factors may affect an offender’s moral culpability. Exposure to anti-social behaviour over an extended period may make it easier for an offender to make bad decisions (at para 22). Cognitive difficulties falling short of Not Criminally Responsible (NCR) finding may also dispose an offender to make poor choices making them, to that extent, less blameworthy (at para 23). 
•


“De facto” consent cannot be a mitigating factor (at para 190). Limited frequency and duration of offences only points to a lack of aggravating factors (at paras 195-197). Reference to neutral factors may assist in distinguishing the offender from the circumstances of other offenders who have committed similar offences (at para 201). 
•


Court held s 172.1(1)(b) mandatory minimum violated s 12 of the Charter and is therefore of no force or effect (at para 389). 
Sentence Imposed: 
•


On the s 172.1(1)(b) offence the judge sentenced the accused to probation for three years. Ancillary orders imposed were a DNA order under s 487.051(1), a SOIRA order under s 490.012, and a Prohibition Order under s 161 prohibiting the accused from employment or volunteering with persons under the age of 16 and from having any contact with persons under the age of 16. 
 
 

 Alberta cases that pre-date Friesen:
a.


 R v ER, 2019 ABPC 292(ER)
Facts: 
•


AC was 56, the CO was 15 years old. The AC’s and CO’s families had become friends through their church community. Text messages, email and telephone calls were exchanged between AC and CO over a five-week period, usually late at night. Messages include sexualized grooming type texts, and in one phone call the AC asked the CO to touch herself. There were no in-person conversations or contact. 
•


AC entered early guilty plea, had no record and good employment history. The PSR was favourable, and the FACS Assessment report opined he was a low risk to reoffend. AC brought a s 12 challenge to the one-year MMS.
Sentence Imposed: 
•


Four months’ incarceration plus 18 months’ probation.
 
 

 Cases that pre-date Friesen and/or are from out-of-jurisdiction:
a.


 R v Woodward, 2011 ONCA 610(Woodward)
Facts: 
•


30-year-old AC met 12-year-old CO in an online chat room and progressed to texting with her. They exchanged hundreds of text messages during which he explained to her the sex acts he wanted her to perform. He offered her millions of dollars to have sex with him. As her family had serious financial problems, she agreed to meet him after he raised the amount he offered her. He took steps to convince her that he had the means to pay and employed a ruse in which someone pretended to be a bank employee confirming that the accused had millions. He later pretended to transfer millions of dollars into an account in her name. 
•


When they met, he put the CO’s hand on his penis, had her perform fellatio on him, and had vaginal intercourse with her. 
•


AC was convicted of sexual assault, sexual interference, invitation to sexual touching, attempting to obtain for consideration the sexual services of a person under the age of 18, and child luring. 
Sentence Imposed: 
•


The 6.5-year global sentence was upheld on appeal (five years for sexual assault, four years concurrent for sexual interference, two years concurrent for invitation to sexual touching, 12 months concurrent for attempting to obtain sexual services for consideration, and 18 months consecutive for child luring). 
 
 
b.


R v Moolla, 2021 ONSC 3702 (Moola) (conviction appeal dismissed 2022 ONCA 433) 




Facts: 
•


35-year-old AC put an ad on Craigslist seeking sexual relationship with a young female. An undercover police officer, posing as a 14-year-old girl, responded. A lengthy text message conversation ensued over two days, with the clear purpose being for the AC and the girl to engage in sex. The AC sent the girl a photo of his genitals. Police arrested the AC on his way to meet the girl. 
•


AC was on probation at the time for criminal harassment and had a prior unrelated record with four entries. 
•


AC was convicted of luring, making sexually explicit material available to a child (stayed due to R v Kienapple, 1974 CanLII 14 (SCC), [1975] 1 SCR 729 [Kienapple]), and breach of probation. 
Sentence Imposed: 
•


The Court followed the ONCA in Woodward and imposed 3.5 years jail for luring and six months concurrent for the breach of probation.
 
 
 
c.

 R v TJ 2021 ONCA 392 (TJ)
Facts: 
•


The AC’s age was not mentioned. All that is divulged is that he was the father of at least two sons. The CO, who was six or seven years old at the time, and her brother, were having a sleepover with AC’s sons. AC forced CO to rub his penis and invited her to perform fellatio, but she refused and left the room. 
•


AC was convicted of sexual assault, sexual interference (stayed due to Kienapple), and invitation to sexual touching (stayed due to Kienapple). 
•


Sentencing judge found AC was in a position of trust over CO. 
Sentence Imposed: 
•


Nine months jail plus two years’ probation overturned by Court of Appeal. 24 months’ jail substituted (but the Court of Appeal decided not to reincarcerate AC). 
 
d.

R v Folino (2005), 202 CCC (3d) 353, 2005 CanLII 40543 (ONCA)(Folino)
Facts: 
•


35-year-old AC entered a guilty plea to luring. He sent emails and had live chats with a girl he believed to be 13 years old over a two-week period. The messages had sexual content, and the AC arranged to meet with the child and was arrested at the meeting spot.
•


AC had no record, was married with children and good employment record. Psychiatric assessments opined that the offence occurred during a major depressive episode and he was a low risk to reoffend. This is a sentence appeal of a nine-month plus3 years’ probation sentence and lifetime s 161 order, with the AC arguing for a CSO. 
 Sentence Imposed: 
•


18-month CSO plus three years’ probation. 
 
 

 Several of the offenders in the above-mentioned cases, fell into the Morrison prototype offender – an individual who trolled the internet to lure unsuspecting children (Lemay, Misay, Woodward, Moola, and Folino). Several others involved the aggravating factor of a breach of trust, or the accused had a familial connection with the complainant (Boucher, EF, DCH, Deren, Jissink, and TJ).
 

 The only cases provided that did not fall into either of these categories were Melrose and ER. The distinguishing feature between ER and Wall is the age disparity. In ER the offender was a mature 56-year-old individual; Wall is a youthful offender at age 22. ER was sentenced to four months’ incarceration followed by 18 months’ probation. 
 

 In Melrose the Court struck down the s 172.1(1)(b) CC mandatory minimum sentence as unconstitutional and imposed a suspended sentence and three years’ probation. Melrose can be distinguished on its facts given the significant cognitive deficits that the offender suffered with. 
 
VII.


 Fit and Appropriate Sentence
 

 It is precisely because no two cases are identical, that sentencing is an individualized process. 
 

 A significant distinction from all the cases provided, is Wall’s acknowledgment of his wrongdoing by attending the police station requesting assistance prior to any criminal investigation or complaint being filed. Did Wall’s strict religious upbringing influence his decision to confess? Although I was not provided a reason for Wall’s confession, it was clearly communicated that there was no pending investigation or report filed, nor any suggestion of a threat of same. This was not a pre-emptive strike. As such, I will give Wall the benefit of the doubt and accept that his moral compass recalibrated and guided him in the right direction. 
 

 I also note that no Victim Impact Statement was filed by the complainant, despite the Crown advising her of her opportunity to do so. There was a letter of support filed by the complainant’s sister AJ. I understand that this was to be accepted as her position and not necessarily the wishes of the family. 
 

 In November 2022, post-Friesen, Bill C-5 received Royal Assent. Bill C-5 revoked several of the sentencing provisions which previously prohibited the granting of a Conditional Sentence Order (CSO). Prior to this amendment a CSO was prohibited for an offence where the Crown proceeded by indictment and the maximum penalty was 14 years imprisonment. As a result of the legislative changes, s 742.1 now reads:
If a person is convicted of an offence and the court imposes a sentence of imprisonment of less than two years, the court may, for the purpose of supervising the offender's behaviour in the community, order that the offender serve the sentence in the community, subject to the conditions imposed under section 742.3, if
(a) the court is satisfied that the service of the sentence in the community would not endanger the safety of the community and would be consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing set out in sections 718 to 718.2;
(b) the offence is not an offence punishable by a minimum term of imprisonment;
(c) the offence is not an offence under any of the following provisions:
(i) section 239, for which a sentence is imposed under paragraph 239(1)(b) (attempt to commit murder),
(ii) section 269.1 (torture), or
(iii) section 318 (advocating genocide); and
(d) the offence is not a terrorism offence, or a criminal organization offence, prosecuted by way of indictment, for which the maximum term of imprisonment is 10 years or more.
 

 Had Parliament intended to prohibit any sexual offence against a child from receiving a CSO, they could have included that exception in the legislation. 
 

 It is not challenged that society’s concern over the prevalence of sexual violence against children is real, and the protection of children in our society is paramount. 
 

 There is no question that sexual offences against a child are serious offences that favor incarceration absent exceptional circumstances. However, to say that every offender that commits a sexual offence against a child must be imprisoned, is failing to consider the overarching sentencing principle of proportionality. 
 

 While it has been conceded that there is no starting point for child luring, I think it beneficial to refer to comments made by the Supreme Court in Proulx. Proulx made it clear that a starting point sentence had no place when considering a conditional sentence. The Court stated at para 88:
The minimal benefits of uniformity in these circumstances are exceeded by the costs of the associated loss of individualization in sentencing. By creating offence-specific starting points, there is a risk that these starting points will evolve into de facto minimum sentences of imprisonment. This would thwart Parliament’s intention of not excluding particular categories of offence from the conditional sentencing regime. It could also result in the imposition of disproportionate sentences in some cases.
 

 Proulx, further stated at para 102 (quoting from para 81 of R v M(CA), 1996 CanLII 230 (SCC), 1 SCR 500): 
Incarceration will usually provide more denunciation than a conditional sentence, as a conditional sentence is generally a more lenient sentence than a jail term of equivalent duration. That said, a conditional sentence can still provide a significant amount of denunciation. This is particularly so when onerous conditions are imposed and the duration of the conditional sentence is extended beyond the duration of the jail sentence that would ordinarily have been imposed in the circumstances. 
 

 Denunciation and deterrence are the paramount sentencing principles when sentencing an offender for a sexual offence against a child; however, as stated in Proulx a properly crafted conditional sentence order can provide a significant amount of denunciation. As for deterrence, and given the circumstances of this case, I do not find that specific deterrence is an overwhelming concern. Wall is a youthful offender with no prior criminal record and has abided by release conditions, he voluntarily turned himself in without any prior investigation or complaint having been initiated, and he is not the prototype target offender referred to in Morrison. As for general deterrence, I make this comment: considering the particulars of this case, what precisely would a jail sentence be deterring? Would it deter a prospective offender from committing a similar offense, or if jail was inevitable, would it deter an offender who committed a similar offence from doing the right thing and prospectively turning themself in?
 

 As stated by the Court in R v Fraser, 2007 ABCA 386 (CanLII), 2007ABCA 386 at para 17:
Part of the objectives of the law are not merely to deter criminals, but to enhance public respect for the law, to invigorate the confidence of the public in justice, and to affirm that where an offender takes steps to promptly admit guilt, to take full or fuller responsibility than even accused against that person, and to make reparations, such conduct deserves considerable weight. [Emphasis added.]
 

 Although Fraser is not a child sexual offence case, the same sentencing principle should apply. 
 

 I also refer to a recent Alberta Court of Appeal decision R v Friesen 2022 ABCA 147 (Friesen ABCA). In Friesen ABCA the Crown appealed a CSO of 24 months less a day followed by two years’ probation after a conviction following a guilty plea for one count of possession of child pornography, contrary to s 163.1(4) CC. The facts revealed that after the police completed their investigation, the accused was found to have possessed 102 unique images of child pornography on his phone, depicting girls between the ages of six and 16 years old, and six unique videos of child pornography depicting children between the ages of 10 and 14 years old. The accused was 21 years old with a high school education and a promising music career. He grew up in a dysfunctional family and at an early age he had been sexually abused by an adopted uncle. After being charged the accused began counselling and therapy for addictions and sexual deviancy. At the time of sentencing, he had completed treatment. Three reports were entered at sentencing: one assessed the offender as a low risk of reoffending and the other two opined that due to his progress in treatment no further counselling or therapy was recommended. The Court stated at para 52:
The sentencing judge correctly noted that incarceration will usually provide more denunciation and deterrence than a conditional sentence order, but that in some circumstances a conditional sentence can achieve those goals, particularly where the conditions are onerous and the order is for a longer duration than a candidate jail sentence would be.
 

 Among other things the Crown argued that the sentencing judge erred in finding that the accused’s circumstances were exceptional. The Court disagreed saying at para 56: 
...[W]hat separated the respondent’s circumstances from other perpetrators of the same offence were: (1) the extent of the collateral consequences suffered by the respondent were greater than those normally suffered by offenders convicted of possessing child pornography; and (2) that he had deep insight into the wrongfulness of child pornography, he was remorseful, had taken considerable steps to treat his predilection for child pornography and was completely rehabilitated. 
 

 The Court commented that it was open to the sentencing judge to find that the impact on the accused for the loss of his music career was exceptional, and that complete or near complete rehabilitation at the time of sentencing was unusual, and it was not unreasonable to categorize his rehabilitative progress as exceptional (at para 58). The Court upheld the CSO. 
 

 In the case before me, I find the circumstances exceptional. The fact that Wall voluntarily and without duress, attended the police station and disclosed his offence, tells me that he was remorseful and took full responsibility -- or in the words of Fraser “fuller responsibility than even accused [of]” -- for his offending behaviour. The fact that from the outset he advised he wanted to plead guilty, entered a guilty plea prior to any trial date being scheduled, is a youthful offender with no prior criminal record, and has complied with all his release conditions, further reassures this Court that he is little risk to the community. Given these unique circumstances, I find that denunciation and deterrence can be met by the imposition of a CSO of two years less a day followed by two years’ probation. 
 

 The Crown also sought the following mandatory orders: a 20-year SOIRA Order and a DNA Order, both of which are granted.
 

 The Crown also sought a discretionary forfeiture order of the offender’s cell phone, and any other items seized by the police, as offence-related property. I was informed that the police had deleted the images from the offender’s phone. If that is the case, then I see no need to forfeit the phone. I was not advised of any other offence-related property that was seized but am willing to address this separate from this decision should I be advised of any.
 

 The final discretionary order being sought by the Crown was a discretionary s 161 Order, prohibiting the offender for a period of 10 years from: 
i)





 Seeking, obtaining, or continuing employment, whether or not the employment is remunerated, that involves being in a position of trust or authority towards persons under the age of 16 years.
ii)




 Becoming or being a volunteer in a capacity that involves being in a position of trust or authority towards persons under the age of 16 years.
iii)




Having any contact – including communicating by means – with a person who is under the age of 16 years.
•


He may communicate via telephone or video call or be in the presence of a person under 16 years of age provided he has the permission of the parent or guardian and he is directly supervised by a responsible adult at all times.
•


The “responsible adult” must be aware of the criminal convictions. 
•


“Directly supervised” requires that the responsible adult must be in his physical presence, or in the physical presence of the person under the age of 16 in the case of telephone or video calls, and the responsible adult must be able to both see and hear him at all times, or only hear him in the case of a telephone call.
•


This condition does not apply to incidental or superficial contact with persons under the age of 16 who are:
•


Customers at his workplace, or
•


Employed at other places of business, as long as such contact is necessary for him to conduct transactions there as a customer.
iv)




Subject to iii) above, using the Internet or other digital network to communicate with a person under the age of 16 years or who the offender believes is under the age of 16 years.
 

 Defense counsel was opposed to the imposition of the discretionary s 161 Order arguing that it would be an undue hardship on Wall as it would limit his interactions with his son.
 

 I agree that prohibiting Wall from any contact, including communicating by any means unless directly supervised, can cause undue hardship for Wall to maintain regular contact with his son. Given my findings, I do not find it is in the public interest to restrict Wall from all forms of contact with persons under the age of 16 years old. He will be prohibited pursuant to s 161(1)(b) for a period of five years from seeking employment or volunteering in situations where he is in position of trust or authority towards persons under the age of 16; he will further be prohibited, for a period of five years, from having any communication via telephone, Internet, or digital network with any person under the age of 16 years unless that child’s guardian is aware of Wall’s conviction, has provided their consent, and has the ability, should they wish, to monitor any communications that they have approved take place. As suggested by the Crown this does not include incidental contact that may necessarily occur via telephone, Internet or digital network with a customer at Wall’s workplace, or necessary contact that Wall may have as a customer himself. 
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/pc/2023abpc9.html
 



The defence has brought an application for further disclosure. The Crown’s position is that all relevant disclosure has been made. Hence an application to the court to decide. The defence application for further disclosure, as best I can determine, lists 179 items they demand be disclosed. It is difficult to quantify because the demand incorporates items within items. The application and evidence called by defence was heard in a voir dire. 
 



The accused was stopped and arrested while driving a motor vehicle by the police in the execution of a warrant of apprehension issued by Corrections Canada. During the search of his motor vehicle a number of firearms were located in the vehicle that are the subject of the charges. Defence are demanding disclosure of not only all items related to the investigation leading to the arrest but all items of an investigation into the discharge of a firearm in a residence some five months previous where the accused’s fingerprints were found on a paper cup in the residence. The accused is not facing charges in relation to that incident but the fingerprint finding is the basis for Corrections Canada issuing the warrant to apprehend the accused who was on statutory release from a sentence he was serving. The disclosure demand includes all material related to police investigations involving the accused over those five months. In addition they demand the disclosure of a video interview of the accused the day after his arrest. They also demand full disclosure of the fingerprint analysis. 
 



Further they demand third party disclosure of a number of Calgary Police Service policies and third party disclosure of Corrections Canada records, reports, notes, correspondence, etc. pertaining to the accused’s parole from February 7, 2022 to the present. As best I can tell those items listed all add up to 72 items demanded from Corrections Canada. 
 



In the voir dire the defence called six witnesses, consisting of five police officers, and one parole officer. I have received written submissions and heard oral submissions from both parties as well as counsel for Corrections Canada and counsel for the Calgary Police Service. Counsel for the police submitted they have already provided their policies requested by defence, so that is no longer an issue in the Application.
The Law of Disclosure 
 



The defence in their submissions on the law refer to the Marshall Inquiry which is the basis for the Supreme Court setting out a regime for disclosure. In Marshall a key eye witness gave an exculpatory statement. After being interviewed by police he gave a second statement that was inculpatory. Only the second statement was disclosed and Marshall was convicted. Both statements should have been disclosed. The Commission made recommendations as to what should be disclosed by the Crown, primarily statements of witnesses produced as a result of the police investigation whether inculpatory or exculpatory. 
 



In R v Stinchcombe, 1991 CanLII 45 (SCC), 3 SCR 326, the Supreme Court took the opportunity to incorporate the Marshall Inquiry recommendations into law and set out a disclosure regime. In Stinchcombe, the accused’s secretary gave evidence at preliminary favourable to the accused. The police then took a statement from her. As a result the Crown decided not to call her as a witness as she was not credible. The defence was advised she gave a statement but would not provide it to the defence. The trial judge did not order it to be disclosed. The Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal without reasons. The Supreme Court determined it should have been disclosed and ordered a new trial. In doing so they set out a disclosure regime incorporating the Marshall Inquiry recommendations. They set out a duty on the Crown to disclose all material evidence whether favourable to the accused or not. However this obligation is not absolute. The evidence must be relevant. It is up to the Crown to determine relevance acting responsibly. In turn defence counsel as officers of the court must also act responsibly to resolve disputes. When they cannot, the matter should be referred by Application to the trial judge to resolve by holding a voir dire. Disclosure is commonly referred to as the fruits of the investigation. The Supreme Court stated full disclosure would result in time being saved through increased guilty pleas, withdrawal of charges, and shortening or waiver of preliminary hearings. 
 



The Supreme Court expanded disclosure in R v O’Connor, 1995 CanLII 51 (SCC), 4 SCR 411 by setting out a regime for third party records. In R v McNeil, 2009 SCC 3 they expanded O’Connor to include production of disciplinary records and criminal investigation files in possession of the police relating to police officers involved in the investigation of the accused. The first step in an O’Connor or McNeil application is for the person seeking production to satisfy the court that the documents are likely relevant to the proceedings. 
 



In R v Gubbins, 2018 SCC 44, the Supreme Court expanded the issue of “likely relevant” to mean if there is a reasonable possibility that the information is logically probative to an issue at trial or to the competence of a witness to testify. The accused must discharge this burden before the judge will examine the record to determine whether and to what extent it should be produced. This depends on whether the information can be qualified as being part of the fruits of the investigation or obviously relevant. The Supreme Court defined “fruits of the investigation” as police investigative files, not their operational records or background information. It refers to information generated or acquired during or as a result of the specific investigation into the charges against the accused. 
 



One other authority is worthy of note which comes from Justice Doherty in R v Girimonte, (1997) 1997 CanLII 1866 (ON CA), 121 CCC (3d) 33 (Ont. C.A.) mentioned by the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal in R v Anderson, 2013 SKCA 92 as follows at paragraph 12.
Disclosure demands which are no more than “fishing expeditions”, seeking everything short of the proverbial kitchen sink undermine the good faith and candour which should govern the conduct of counsel. ... It would be obvious to anyone that the prosecution would resist compliance with such a far fetched demand. Disclosure demands like some of those made in this case seem calculated to create needless controversy and waste valuable resources rather than to assist the accused in making full answer and defence. 
 

 It seems to me the same could be said about many of the items demanded be disclosed in the application before me. 
Analysis
 

 With this law in mind, I now turn to the specific demands for disclosure in this Application. 
 

 Dealing first with the demand for the records of Corrections Canada, I agree with the submissions of counsel from Corrections Canada and the Crown that this court is not the right forum to challenge the issuance of the warrant of apprehension. That is the purview of the Federal system. That is made clear by the Court of Appeal in Ali El Sayed v Canada, 2022 ABCA 188 as well as R v Bird, 2019 SCC 7 and R v Consolidated Maybrun Mines Ltd., 1998 CanLII 820 (SCC), 1 SCR 706 as cited in the written submission of counsel for Corrections Canada. These records are not obviously relevant or part of the fruits of the investigation of the charges the accused is facing. According to the parole officer the warrant was issued as a result of the finding of the accused’s fingerprint at the scene of the discharge of the firearm some five months prior to the arrest. The correctness of the issuance of the warrant is a matter for the Federal system. I would not order those records be disclosed as fruits of the investigation of the charges in the Information.
 

 Similarly the investigation into the discharge of the firearm at a residence in March, and the finding of the fingerprint is a separate investigation and is not relevant to the charges in the Information. He is not facing charges relating to that incident and I can see no obvious relevance to the charges he is facing in this trial. That investigation is not related to the investigation of these charges and therefore is not fruits of the investigation. It does not refer to information generated or acquired during or as a result of the specific investigation into the charges the accused is facing. I would not order information or records from that investigation be disclosed. 
 

 What must be disclosed is any and all material relating to the investigation that led to these charges. The police are obligated to execute any warrant of apprehension issued by Corrections Canada. From the evidence I heard it appears the execution of the warrant began with Detective McPherson. It appears he made the decision to effect the arrest and planned it. Detective Crawford and Constable Futers were also involved. A surveillance team was set up at his residence and when he left in his vehicle he was surveilled until McPherson decided when it was safe to effect the arrest. At that point street constables were directed to physically pull his vehicle over and make the arrest. Subsequently a search warrant was obtained to search the vehicle by Detective Thomas. The next day Detective Neufeld conducted an interview with the accused which was for the primary purpose of investigating the discharge of the weapon in the residence to see if the accused had any information about that incident. 
Disclosure
 

 As a result the following should be disclosed as likely or obviously relevant and as fruits of the investigation resulting in the charges that are set for trial:
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/pc/2023abpc17.html
 



The Offender has been convicted of fraud and transferring proceeds of crime to her own use in the amount of $456,685.13 over a period of 3 years. The victim was a foundation set up by a real estate brokerage firm to contribute to children’s charities. The Offender was acting as treasurer to the foundation and therefore was in a trust position involving the foundation. The evidence and findings of guilt can be found at R v Mann, 2022 ABPC 184.
The fraud involved forging 90 cheques on the foundation account payable to herself and deposited into her own bank account. The proceeds have never been accounted for and I am advised by counsel they are gone and cannot be located. As is the usual case in frauds by a person in a position of trust, she has no criminal record.
 
Principles of Sentencing
 



Section 718 sets out the purpose and principles of sentencing which is to protect society by:
-


 denunciation;
-


 deterrence;
-


 rehabilitation;
-


 providing reparations;
-


 promoting a sense of responsibility in Offenders and acknowledgment of the harm done to victims and the community;
-


 the sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender;
-


 it must account for aggravating or mitigating circumstances;
-


 it must consider whether a position of trust was abused;
-


 the sentence should be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences committed in similar circumstances (the Parity Principle); and
-


 the offender should not be deprived of liberty if less restrictive sanctions are appropriate.
Aggravating Factors
1)





the amount of money involved $456,685.13;
2)





the number of transactions being 90 forged cheques often twice a month and sometimes three or four times a month and on consecutive days;
3)





the fraud continued for over a three-year period;
4)





the fraud deprived children’s charities of the funds which the foundation was set up to assist which the Offender knew;
5)





the Offender was in a position of trust as treasurer of the foundation with few if any controls over the foundation funds which allowed the fraud to continue for so long;
6)





the fraud could have continued indefinitely had the Offender not been terminated for unrelated reasons; and
7)





the funds were used as personal assets and nothing remains. 
 



Section 380.1(1) sets out statutory aggravating circumstances the Court must consider in determining the appropriate sentence. They are as applied to this case:
1)





the magnitude, complexity, duration or degree of planning the fraud;
2)





the Offender took advantage of the high regard in which she was held by the company and the foundation; and
3)





the significant impact on the victims, the less privileged children, the foundation funds were designed to help.
 
Mitigating factors
 



In my view there are none. Section 380.1(2) prohibits consideration of the Offender’s employment skills, status or reputation in the community since they contributed to enabling the Offender to commit the fraud, many of which are detailed in the Pre-Sentence Report and character letters. In many of the fraud authorities, the most common mitigating factors are a guilty plea, restitution and remorse. None are present in this case.
 
Position of the Crown
 



The Crown submits the appropriate sentence is four years incarceration for the fraud and one year consecutive for money laundering for a total of five years in a federal penitentiary. In addition, they seek a fine in lieu of forfeiture in the amount of $450,000 with time to pay of 3 years, and in default, 3 years additional penitentiary time pursuant to sec. 462.37(3) and (4) of the Criminal Code. Finally, they seek an Order pursuant to sec. 380.2 prohibiting the Offender from being employed, volunteering or having authority over another person’s property or money for a period of 10 years.
 
Position of the Defence
 



The defence submits the appropriate sentence is a Conditional Sentence Order for two years less a day for the fraud count followed by a three-year Probation Order, and a one-year Conditional Sentence Order for the money laundering count concurrent to the fraud Conditional Sentence Order. They propose both the Conditional Sentence Order and Probation Order contain Restitution Orders by installment as well as a Restitution Order under sec. 738 for the amount of the fraud with 10 years time to pay.
 
The Authorities
 



Both Crown and defence have provided the Court with a number of authorities to support their position as to the appropriate sentence and to comply with the parity principle.
Therefore, only sentencing authorities for similar offenders committing similar offences in similar circumstances will be of benefit to the Court. As this case was a finding of guilt of fraud by a person in a position of trust from her employer, authorities where there was a guilty plea are not comparable since a guilty plea receives a significant discount. Authorities where the fraud involved significantly less funds or significantly more funds are also not useful for comparison purposes. Cases where the offender was in a significant position of trust in society such as a lawyer are also not useful nor are cases where significant restitution was made.
 



The Crown relies on the Alberta Court of Appeal case of R v Davis, 2014 ABCA 115, a Memorandum of Judgment which is not binding but a useful guide. The Court set out three categories of fraud and the sentences they should attract. In the first category, they cited three cases as follows.
 



R v Bracegirdle, 2004 ABCA 252 was a guilty plea to a $175,000 fraud from her employer, a charitable society; a position of trust with a small amount of restitution was made. The fraud took place over 5½ years. She was given a Conditional Sentence Order for two years less a day. The Court of Appeal substituted a sentence of 2 years less a day actual incarceration saying a conditional sentence does not reflect the appropriate denunciation and deterrence for her crime for which there is no explanation but greed.
 

 R v Fulcher, 2007 ABCA 381, the fraud was $269,000 over 13 months perpetrated on clients of his employer by forging cheques. He pled guilty and has made no restitution. He was sentenced to a Conditional Sentence Order of two years less a day. The Court of Appeal again substituted a sentence of actual incarceration for the same amount of time. In doing so, the Court stated at para 44 as follows:
“In crimes of embezzlement, the sentencing goals of denunciation and deterrence take on a particular importance. If this conditional sentence were left standing, anyone else working in a similar capacity of trust for a similar employer could readily see an obvious blueprint for quick wealth. It shows how to get hundreds of thousands of dollars almost effortlessly with only the potential burden of a conditional sentence of house arrest to fear.”
 

 R v Zenari, 2012 ABCA 279 was a fraud of $225,000 by a constable from the Edmonton Police Service by forging signatures of staff sergeants 71 times for overtime claims. He pled guilty and made restitution.
He was given a Conditional Sentence Order of 2 years less a day. The Court of Appeal, citing the above quote from Fulcher as binding jurisprudence, called for a custodial sentence in cases of employee theft. Taking into account the guilty plea and the restitution, a sentence of 18 months actual incarceration was substituted.
 

 None of these cases in the first category of Davis are applicable to this case because they were all guilty pleas and the amount of the frauds were substantially less. In addition, some restitution had been made. What is instructive is that in each case the Court of Appeal overturned Condition Sentence Order sentences as inappropriate in frauds from employees by a person in a trust position.
 

 The second category of Davis all involve dishonest lawyers with amounts ranging between $700,000 and $2,000,000. The sentences range between 3 and 4 years actual incarceration. Again, this case does not fall into those categories because the amounts are much higher and they were lawyers who are in a much higher trust position in society. The public often have no choice but to deposit funds in a lawyer’s trust account and therefore courts must denounce and deter lawyers from embezzling funds held in trust to promote public confidence by imposing more severe sentences.
 

 The third category is frauds involving over a million dollars where the range is 7 to 8 years incarceration. Again, this category does not apply to this case where the fraud is less than half a million dollars.
 

 The Crown also cites the following cases. In R v Neilson, 2020 ABQB 556, the fraud was over 1.6 million dollars. He was convicted after trial and sentenced to 4½ years for the fraud and one year consecutive for money laundering.
 

 In R v Mella, 2022 ABQB 68, the fraud was 2 million dollars and the sentence was 8 years. He was convicted after trial.
 

 In R v Walker, 2016 ABQB 695, the fraud was $315,000. He pled guilty and received a sentence of 3 years.
 

 In R v Thiel, 2021 ABPC 286, he pled guilty to a fraud of 1.5 million dollars and was sentenced to 4 years.
 

 The defence relies on Court of Appeal cases of R v Evanson, 2019 ABCA 122 and a chart of other cases referred to in that case. Evanson pled guilty to defrauding his employer of $545,773.16 over a 10-year period. He made full restitution and was sentenced to 14 months imprisonment. The Court of Appeal increased the sentence to 2 years on the basis that deterrence and denunciation were paramount objectives of sentencing.
 

 In the chart referred to, only the last two cases are in the same range of the amount of the fraud as in this case; R v Stergiou, 2015 ABCA 35, the amount being $547,000 and R v Jaikaran, 2007 ABCA 98, the amount being $633,000.In Stergiou, the accused pled guilty, made restitution of half of the amount he defrauded and received a sentence of 18 months imprisonment. In Jaikaran, the accused pled guilty, made full restitution and received a sentence of 2 years imprisonment.
 

 In all of the cases, actual incarceration was the sentence. In any case where a Conditional Sentence Order was the trial court’s sentence, the Court of Appeal overturned it and imposed actual incarceration.
 

 The maximum sentence for fraud over is 14 years. The Criminal Code restrictions on conditional sentence orders include offences where the maximum sentences are 14 years or more (sec. 742.1(c)).Following the Supreme Court’s decision in R v Sharma, (2022) SCC 39, in November, 2022, those restrictions were removed from sec. 742.1(c). Therefore, a Conditional Sentence Order is available for fraud over. However, being available does not mean it is an appropriate sentence. In fact, the Court of Appeal has indicated a fraud by a person in a trust position on their employer requires actual incarceration and a Conditional Sentence Order is not appropriate for reasons set out in Fulcher and Zenari. 
 

 In Bracegirdle, the Court quoted from R v Reid, 2004 YKCA 4 at para 13:
“Individuals who commit this class of crime, usually plan and deliberate about it to some extent. Potential offenders in this class of case will, to a greater or lesser degree, be engaged in a process of weighing the risks and benefits.”
At para 42 the Court stated:
“A conditional sentence order cannot reflect appropriate denunciation and deterrence for his crime for which there is no explanation but greed.”
 

 In Fulcher the Court of Appeal stated at para 30:
“..... absent truly exceptional circumstances, the sentencing goals of deterrence and denunciation demand a sentence of imprisonment rather than the imposition of a conditional sentence for crimes of embezzlement or theft by an employee.”
 

 Having regard to these Court of Appeal authorities, as I must, it is clear in the circumstances of this case, fraud by a person in a position of trust upon her employer, a conditional sentence order would not have the necessary deterrence or denunciation, either general or specific even if there had been a guilty plea and restitution made and the only appropriate sentence is actual incarceration.
 

 Defence counsel also raises the issue that the Offender is diabetic and requires daily doses of medication. A letter from a doctor was submitted detailing the medication she would require should she be incarcerated. I am satisfied the necessary medication as outlined would be available in an institution. Being diabetic is treatable unlike some other diseases such as cancer that is terminable or the Offender is elderly and immobile, that has been considered in some cases such as Fulcher, Jaikaran and Walker and did not avoid actual incarceration as a result.
 

 I find whether or not a sentence of less than 2 years is appropriate or the Offender is not a danger to the community, the two remaining restrictions to the imposition of a conditional sentence order, a conditional sentence order is not the appropriate sentence, only actual incarceration is appropriate.
 
The Length of Incarceration
 

 The Crown submits 5 years is the appropriate sentence. The defence submits 2 years less a day is appropriate.
 

 The Crown’s analysis is based on the second category of Davis which is 3 to 4 years if the offender is a lawyer. This Offender is not a lawyer and therefore not in that category. The first category is frauds of less than $250,000 attracting sentences of less than 2 years. This offender is not in that category either. In Neilson, the fraud sentence was 4½ years but the fraud was over 1 million dollars, more than twice the fraud here. In R v Schoer, 2019 ONCA 105, the fraud was $413,500 and the sentence was 4 years. In R v Walker, 2016 ABQB 695, the fraud was $315,000 and on a guilty plea, the sentence was 3 years.
 

 I find the range for this case is 3 to 4 years but should not be at the high end of the range which is the category for lawyer fraud. Given the amount of this fraud over a 3-year period by a person in a position of trust, perpetrated on her employer to the disadvantage of children’s charities, I conclude the fraud sentence should be 3½ years using the principle of parity.
 

 The Crown submits the sentence for using the proceeds of crime should be another year consecutive. Two authorities have dealt with this issue. In Neilson, the court agreed the sentence for using proceeds should be consecutive. In R v Mella, 2022 ABQB 68, the Court considered Neilson but determined it would be double counting to increase the sentence for money laundering.
 

 In this case, I find the fraud and the use of the proceeds are one and the same transaction. The purpose of the fraud was to transfer the monies into her own account to use for her own purposes. Using the proceeds was synonymous with the fraud. It should not be treated separately for sentencing purposes. Therefore, the sentence for using the proceeds will be one year concurrent with the fraud sentence.
 
Fine in Lieu of Forfeiture
 

 Section 462.37(3) provides for a find in lieu of forfeiture. Defence acknowledges the proceeds of the fraud are gone and unrecoverable. Therefore, an Order of Forfeiture would be meaningless. In that situation, the Court can impose a fine in lieu. The Crown submits a fine in the amount of the fraud should be imposed with a term of further imprisonment if not paid in accordance with the amount of the fraud as set out in sec. 462.37(4). For the amount of this fraud sec. 462.37(4)(vi) would apply and the further imprisonment if not paid would be not less than 3 years and not more than 5 years. The Crown submits time to pay of 3 years would be appropriate.
 

 The defence submits a restitution order is appropriate but should be a free-standing order under sec. 738. The problem with a sec. 738 order is there is no incentive to make restitution as there are no consequences if not paid other than the victim filing a Civil Order of Judgment. Section 462.37(3) is designed to have consequences of incarceration as the incentive to pay the fine.
 

 I have reviewed the authorities provided by the Crown on this issue, particularly R v Lavigne, 2006 SCC 10, R v Kazman, 2018 ONSC 2332, Neilson, Mella, Schoer, Walker and R v Angelis, 2016 ONCA 675. 
 

 From those authorities I derived the following principles. The purpose of the section is to ensure the Offender is deprived of the proceeds of her crime. Where that purpose cannot be achieved because the proceeds no longer exist, the objective can still be achieved by a fine in lieu. The ability to pay is not a factor. The fine is to be the equivalent of the value of the fraud. Once it is determined the property or money is the proceeds of the crime of which the Offender has been convicted as here, a Forfeiture Order is mandatory as is a fine in lieu. The only discretion the trial judge has is determining the amount of the proceeds of the crime and the length of time to pay. The Supreme Court in Lavigne stated:
“ .... the discretion granted under that provision is limited and that ability to pay may not be taken into consideration either in the decision to impose the fine or in the determination of the amount of the fine.”
 

 The section is designed to ensure crime does not pay, to give teeth to the general sentencing provisions and deter the Offender from committing crimes in the future. A fine is technically part of the sentence and its purpose is to replace the proceeds of crime, so it is not regarded as punishment specifically for the designated offence. The mere fact the property consists of cash, and has been used or spent, as here, cannot serve as a way to avoid the fine. The fine must equal the amount of the cash stolen.
 

 I have already determined the amount of the fraud taken from the foundation was $456,685.13. I therefore impose a fine in that amount and using my discretion as granted by the section as to time to pay, make it payable within 5 years of the Offender’s release from the 3½ years of incarceration. If not paid within that time, the Offender will be incarcerated for an additional 3 years consecutive, pursuant to the minimum time set out in sec. 462.37(4)(vi). The fine or any part of it if paid is payable to the clerk of court but not into general treasury. It will be refunded to Colliers to the attention of Mr. Law or his designate to be distributed to the children’s charities the foundation was set up to support. It was those charities that was deprived of the funds and should benefit from any repayment by way of fine.
 
Order Under Section 380.2
 

 An Order of Prohibition under this section is appropriate to prevent the Offender from having control over other people’s money or property. The order will be for a period of 10 years from the date of this sentence which will include both the sentence of incarceration and any time in lieu if the fine is not paid.
 
DNA Order
 

 I find a DNA Order is not necessary for this type of crime.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Victim Fine Surcharge
 

 Given the length of incarceration, a victim fine surcharge is not appropriate nor necessary.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/pc/2023abpc7.html
 



The accused is charged with sexual interference.
 



The female complainant, at the time of the alleged offence was 13 years of age.
 



The accused at the time of the alleged offence was 19 years of age.
 



It is alleged that the accused, and another individual had cell phone contact with the complainant by way of social media. In exchange for rides and drugs, the complainant allegedly agreed to engage in sexual activity with the accused on three separate occasions. 
 



The defence raised at trial that no sexual activity occurred between the complainant and the accused.
 



The main issue in this case is the Court’s assessment of the credibility and reliability of the complainant and another civilian witness who testified at trial in determining if the Crown has proven the case beyond a reasonable doubt.
 



For the reasons that follow, the accused is found not guilty.
Charge
 



The accused is charged in an Information as follows:
Count 1: Between the 1st day of November, 2020, and the 31st day of December, 2020, both dates inclusive, at or near Airdrie, Alberta, did, for a sexual purpose, unlawfully touch, directly or indirectly, with a part of the body or with an object, a part of the body of the complainant, a person under the age of sixteen years, contrary to section 151 of the Criminal Code of Canada.
Evidence
 



The Crown called two witnesses at trial, the complainant MPP and a female friend of the complainant, MCA.
 

 No evidence was called by the Defence.
 

 By consent, the complainant, MPP testified outside the Courtroom byway of CCTV.
 

 In examination-in-chief she testified that she was currently 15 years old, in Grade 10, and resided in Airdrie Alberta.
 

 She recalled sitting down with Dr. Sarah MacDonald for an interview in February 2021. She was unable to remember who arranged the interview. She initially referred to the doctor as “him”, but then said that she remembered meeting with a female, “Sara” in the Victims Services Building in Calgary. She confirmed that she had an opportunity to read a transcript of the interview. 
 

 When asked how old she was in February 2021, she said that she was 13 years old. When asked if she was telling the truth at the time of the interview, she replied, “Yes, I was telling the truth.”
 

 At this point, the Crown played video evidence of the interview for the Court. The CD and accompanying transcript were marked as Exhibit 1-A and Exhibit 1-B.
 

 After watching the video of her interview, the Complainant again confirmed that she was telling the truth in her interview. In the video, she talked about three encounters with the Accused.
 

 In regard to the first encounter, she testified that the first time she was with the Accused she was in Cochrane. She was taking a medication called Concerta at the time for her ADHD. She also testified about her drug use at the time, which included marijuana and cocaine usage. She said that she was addicted to cocaine and used it from ages 11 – 14. She testified as follows:
Q.

 So during this period of time that we’re talking about with the accused, were you taking drugs at that time?
A.


Yes, I was.
 
Q.

 Okay, sorry. Were you taking cocaine at that time?
A.


Not when I saw him, but I was taking it.
 

 She testified that she met the Accused on “Quick Ad”, which she described as a feature on Snapchat. She later met the Accused in-person for the first time in Cochrane and performed oral sex on him. She said that he performed oral sex until he ejaculated in her mouth. She testified that her pants were off, that her shirt was on, and that the Accused’s pants were off. She described the penis of the Accused and noted that it was hard. She said that the Accused tried to put his penis in her. She said that before the Accused tried to put his penis inside of her, she asked if he could put on a condom, and that he put a condom on.
 

 In regard to the second encounter, she testified that it occurred before she was arrested. She said she performed oral sex on the Accused until he ejaculated in her mouth.
 

 In regard to the third encounter, she testified that she performed oral sex on the Accused until he ejaculated. She said that she was pretty sure he ejaculated either in her mouth or on her clothes. In the context of this third encounter, she further mentioned a conversation about her age:
Q.

 -you say in there, I told him I was 13, and he – and they didn’t care. Can you tell us how that conversation came up?
A.


So before they picked me up, I – over text, I have told them, heh, by the way, I don’t know if you know, but I am 13, because I knew that they were 19 and I didn’t know if MCA told them I was 16, but afterwards they did clarify that she did tell them I was 16. So – 
 
Q.

 And the third time you’re referring to them, is that JA and the Accused?
A.


Yes.
 
Q.

 How did you know that they were – you were texting them?
A.


I knew I was texting them, because I was sending them messages. I wanted them to pick me up. I wanted to see them. It was right after I got out of RSD. I – you know, that’s it.
 
Q.

 Did you receive any text messages back from them?
A.


Yes. They said that it was okay that I was 13 and that it didn’t really matter.
 
Q.

 Okay. And was there – did you ever have a face-to-face conversation with them about this?
A.


I had a face-to-face conversation with JA after the fact of me being 13. It was after we dropped off the Accused.
 
 

 The Complainant attended the courtroom in-person for the purpose of identifying the Accused.
 

 In cross-examination, she confirmed that she began using cocaine at the age of 11. She said that she developed an addiction and was using cocaine two or three times per week at the time. She also smoked marijuana on a regular basis during this time. She said that she was not working and would get money to bey these drugs from selling marijuana, selling vapes, or would sometimes “go out and try to find people”. She used both cocaine and marijuana during the time period of November 2020 to the end of December 2020. 
 

 She testified that she consumed alcohol once or twice a week during this time period. On these occasions, she would drunk until she was drunk or tipsy. Defence counsel suggested that her doctor specifically told her not to consume drugs or alcohol while taking her ADHD medication. She said yes, and that she disregarded their advice. Defence counsel suggested that her doctor told her that mixing drugs in this way could affect her perception of events and could also affect her memory of events. She said yes, and that she continued to do so.
 

 Defence counsel also suggested that she ran away from home during this time period, as well as before and after this time period. She said yes. She would also sneak out of the house. She was asked about contacting people on Snapchat and said she would contact random people on occasion. In addition to obtaining rides to places from these people, she agreed that she would sometimes obtain marijuana and cocaine from them. Defence counsel suggested that she was currently facing a charge of robbery in youth court. She agreed. One of the people she was charge in connection with was MCA.
 

 Defence counsel referred to the interview where MPP confessed that she had no memory whatsoever of certain events in her life. She remembered giving that testimony. She testified and an Airdrie RCMP officer showed her a picture of the Accused after February of 2021. Defence counsel suggested that the officer indicated that this was the person who sexually assaulted her. She agreed.
 

 In regard to the first encounter with the Accused, she testified that the meeting was arranged through MCA. She was having a sleepover at MCA’s, and MCA wanted to go to Calgary. She said that she had contact with the Accused over Snapchat, before meeting him. She testified that the Accused added her on Snapchat. She referenced “Quick Ad”, but Defence counsel put to her that she didn’t know how the Accused added her. She agreed. 
 

 She testified that she met JA in-person before she met the Accused. Defence counsel suggested that she had a crush on JA, because she would do things like take pictures of herself and JA, send those pictures to MCA, and talked to MCA about how much she liked JA. She said that was true, but that she was lying to MCA about having a crush on JA. She said that MCA was one of her best friends, and that she had lied to make herself feel better in the moment. Defence counsel suggested that she lies to people to feel better about herself. She admitted to this. Defence counsel also suggested that one of the things she continually liked to people about during this time period was her age. She agreed.
 

 Defence counsel suggested that she lied about her age to MCA who was 16 years old, continually telling MCA that she was 16 or older. She disagreed and said this was not true.
 

 In regard to the first encounter, she testified that she met the Accused at a church in Cochrane when the Accused got into JA’s vehicle. They discussed going to a spot overlooking the city, and then she left with the Accused and went into the passenger seat of his vehicle. She said that MCA and JA remained in JA’s vehicle.
 

 Defence counsel pointed out a difference between this testimony and her interview. In the interview, she had said that she got into the Accused’s car, and they agreed to go to a spot overlooking the city. She acknowledged this difference, and then testified that MCA and JA also drove up to the overlook at the same time in JA’s vehicle. She believed that JA and MCA were having sex in JA’s vehicle while she was having sexual contact with the Accused in the Accused’s vehicle.
 

 She testified that she performed oral sex on the Accused. She said they were in the backseat of a gray minivan with sliding doors that the Accused was driving. She said that he produced the condom. She testified that he attempted to have sex wit her, but that it was too painful. Prior to the sexual encounter, she had been smoking marijuana. She thought she had one or two bowls, about a gram of leaf marijuana. She testified that she was high by the time she got to Cochrane. Defence counsel suggested that she was telling people during this time that she was 16 years old. She agreed. Defence counsel suggested that she didn’t really recall what happened after the sexual contact, and she agreed. 
 

 In regard to the second encounter, she testified that this was the second time she had sexual contact with the accused and that it occurred the same night in November she was ultimately arrested by the Airdrie RCMP. She contacted the Accused on Snapchat, and he came to pick her up from her house. Defence counsel suggested that she lied to her mother, saying she was going to a friend’s house for a sleepover, and that she had someone phone her mother and pretend to be her friend’s father. She agreed. The Accused picked her up and drover to a 7-11 store to pick up MCA and a friend named JB. After dropping both JB and MCA off around 5 pm, she and the Accused stopped at a church parking lot in Airdrie and had sexual contact before going to a house to sell someone marijuana.
 

 After the sexual contact, she smoked marijuana using a bong and “greened out”. She testified this meant that she was vomiting, and it made her sick, but that she was “sober enough”. She said that she and the Accused picked up MCA from work around 8pm. She testified that JA showed up at some point. Defence suggested that she was having difficulty recalling the time JA arrived because of the amount of marijuana she had consumed that night. She agreed. She and the Accused picked up a friend of MCA’s, than went to MCA’s other friend’s house where they sat in the Accused’s vehicle. The Complainant, the Accused, MCA and a person name SC drove to Croxford High School around 11pm and met up with two males. She testified that she, together with the people she was with, tried to rob the two males of 130 single sue tobacco capes (or “puff bars”). The Complainant, the Accused, MCA and a person named SC then went to a skate park where they were arrested by the RCMP.
 

 She was arrested and taken into custody at the RCMP detachment. The next day her mother picked her up from the RCMP detachment. She testified that she told her mother about the “puff bars” but that she was too scared to tell her that she “had sex”. Defence counsel suggested that throughout this time, she was again telling people she was 16. She denied this. Defence counsel suggested that she continued to lie to her mother during this time period and that she ran away to contact peoples she knew she shouldn’t be contacting. She agreed.
 

 In regard to the third encounter, she testified that it occurred four days before Christmas. She said that she stole her mother’s phone, snuck out of her window, and ran away from home. Defence suggested that she was lying to people about her age, including MCA. She denied this several times. She then said that when she did tell “them” she was 13 they didn’t care. She testified that she used her mother’s phone and messaged them that she was 13. Defence counsel suggested that her mother had taken Snapchat off her phone, but she denied this. She testified that she Snapchatted JA first and told him she was only 13. She said that JA told her he did not care. She testified that she used her mother’s phone to text the Accused that she was 13. Defence counsel put to her that she felt it was necessary to tell the Accused that she was only 13, despite telling the Court earlier that the Accused already knew she was 13. She agreed.
 

 She testified that the Accused and JA picked her up from her house on that third encounter. That Accused and JA picked her up in JA’s vehicle. They then drove into Calgary, and she testified that she performed oral sex on the Accused until he ejaculated in her mouth. She testified that this sexual encounter occurred by a school in the back seat of the vehicle while JA was in the front seat. She said that JA drove the Accused home and that they went to Superstore where JA was shovelling snow. She remained in the vehicle and used her mother’s phone to text friends until it died. Defence counsel put to her that in her interview she said that the RCMP phones at some point, and that this was not true. She agreed. She then clarified that she charged her phone afterwards when they were driving and that she was at JA’s house when the RCMP called.
 

 Defence counsel then put a number of suggestions to the Complainant: 
Q.

 ...what I’m going to suggest to you is this. You met my client, the Accused, on one occasion and one occasion only and that was the time in November when you were arrested by the police in Airdrie; isn’t that true?
A.


No.
 
Q.

 And at no time did my client ever have any form of sexual contact with you; isn’t that true?
A.


God.
 
Q.

 He did not allow you to perform oral sex on him, did he?
A.


Yes, he did.
 
Q.

 He did not attempt to penetrate you vaginally, did he?
A.


Yes, he did.
 
Q.

 I’m suggesting he didn’t and that, again this story you told SD and that you’ve told the Court is one of these lies you make up on the spur of the moment to better your situation, isn’t that true?
A.

 Yes.
Q.

 Yes. Okay. Thank you.
 
 

 In re-examination, the Complainant said that she was in grade eight in November and December of 2020. She said that MCA was in grade eleven. She testified that the first time she was with the Accused in Cochrane she was with him for about an hour and a half. The second time she was with him, she was with him for more than five hours. The third time she was with him, she was with him for two hours.
 

 By consent, MCA testified outside the Courtroom by way of CCTV.
 

 In examination-in-chief, she testified she was 17 years old, in grade 12, and resides in Airdrie, Alberta.
 

 In November and December of 2020, she was in high school in grade eleven. She testified that she knows MPP. She could not remember how they met, but thought it was through friends in Airdrie. She said that she met the Accused and JA through a friend named SC. She met them in-person with MPP in Airdrie near a 7-11 store. She testified that this first meeting occurred around two years ago in the winter, or maybe between summer and winter. They drove around, went to a girl named KD’s house, dropped her off, and then went to the skate park. There were police at the skate park, and everyone was detained.
 

 Crown counsel asked if this was the first time she had met JA and the Accused. She said it was. She said they were with them around two hours before they were detained. Crown counsel asked if she ever saw JA and that Accused after that date. She testified that she saw JA once with MPP and SC, around three weeks after that date. She also said that there was another time where MPP was alone with JA, and that she was not there. 
 

 When asked if there was ever a time where she and MPP were with JA and the Accused, she said there was a time at Nose Hill Park. She testified this occurred on a different date from the date they were detained.
Q.

 Okay. Tell us about the second time?
A.


I think I was in Calgary with MPP. She was staying with me at EF’s, one of my friends I was staying with at the time. And they picked us up and then we drove around down town and then went to the view spot.
 
Q.

 You went to that spot?
A.


Yeah. And then we got to go back to EF’s house. And they dropped us off at EF’s.
 
...
 
Q.

 Okay. So you and MPP were with JA and the Accused?
A:

 M-hm.
 
Q.

 And you went to a spot in Nose Hill, is that what you were saying?
A.


Yeah.
 
Q.

 Okay. What vehicle were you in? What kind of vehicle were you in?
A.


JA’s was a truck, I think it was – it was a four door. I can’t remember the colour. And then the Accused I believe was driving a car.
 
Q.

 Okay. So there were two separate cars. And what – what happened up there where – 
A.


the reason – the reason I think they were in separate cars is because the Accused lived in Cochrane and then JA lives in Calgary. So then JA is closer to me and MPP and then we kind of just all met up, if that makes sense. 
 
Q.

 Okay.
A.


Like he drove from Cochrane.
 
 

 She said that JA picked them up from EF’s house, which was really close to Nose Hill “like a five-minute drive almost”. She said that JA was driving a truck, and that it was a four door. She also said that she believed the Accused was driving a car, and that he drove in from where he lived in Cochrane. The Accused met up with them at Nose Hill. She said they “blasted music for a bit and then they had to go”. She testified that she thought MPP asked JA to driver her to Airdrie, and that she was not sure where the Accused went. 
 

 When asked how long they were at Nose Hill, she said that she thought they were at Nose Hill for 45 minutes. She testified that MPP was with her in JA’s vehicle. When asked when this encounter took place, she was unsure but thought it was two weeks after the first meeting.
 

 Crown counsel asked if she knew how old MPP was. She testified that MPP was always lying about her age. She said that MPP claimed to be 15 or 16, but that she found out when they were detained that she was 13 or 14. She testified that she did not know MPP’s age before they were detained. Crown counsel suggested to her that she spoke to MPP at a time when they got arrested again. She denied this. She said that she talked to MPP during that time period when she was alone with JA. She said that MPP called her on Facetime, sitting in the truck, and that MPP said she was with JA outside of Superstore. She asked MPP to come to EF’s house where she was staying but did not hear from her for days. 
 

 She testified that she worked at Michael’s in Airdrie at the time. She said that she and MPP had gotten in trouble with the police since that time, referencing a robbery.
 

 MCA attended the courtroom in-person for the purpose of identifying the Accused.
 

 In cross-examination, Defence counsel suggested that MPP would frequently lie to her. She agreed. She also agreed that MPP would lie to her about her age. She testified that when she met MPP, MPP told her and other people that she was 15 turning 16. She testified that she did not find out until after the last time she saw the Accused that MPP was only 13. She said that MPP was very manipulative.
 

 She testified that she was with MPP the first time she met the Accused. Defence counsel suggested to her this first meeting occurred towards the middle or end of November of 2020. She agreed that it was around October or November. She testified that at this first meeting JA was driving his truck and that the Accused was driving a small, four door car. She said that she, MPP, the Accused, JA, and SC all went to her friend KD’s house. She did not remember working at Michael’s that evening. She testified that they did not meet up with another group of people. She said they did not get in a fight with anybody, although she mentioned an argument at the skate park. At this time, she said they were all in the car that the Accused was driving. She said that she was in the middle back seat, with SC to her left and MPP to her right. She said that the Accused was in the driver’s seat and JA was in the passenger seat.
 

 She testified that the RCMP came to the skate park, and that she received information which led her to believe the car the Accused was driving may have been stolen. They were all detained and taken to the RCMP detachment. She said that Madison was there for around 45 minutes, and that she was there for around an hour and a half.
 

 She said that the next time she was with MPP and saw the Accused, that it occurred in Calgary. She said that JA picked her and MPP up and they drove to Nose Hill Park. She said that the Accused met them at Nose Hill and that he was driving a Jeep or a green car, but could not remember the vehicle specifically. She testified that she, MPP and JA were in JA’s truck, and then the Accused either came into the truck or they went into the Accused’s vehicle. 
 

 She testified that she had contact with MPP about three days after the Nose Hill Park encounter. Defence counsel suggested that she also talked to MPP in December when MPP told her she was in JA’s vehicle. She testified that she did not have a romantic relationship with JA. Defence counsel suggested to her that MPP had a crush on JA. She agreed, noting that MPP said she found both JA and the Accused attractive. She also testified that MPP sent her one selfie of her with JA. She said that she understood the Accused used a couple of different names, including Timothy and Ira. 
 

 In re-examination, Crown counsel asked her to clarify what she meant when she called MPP manipulative in cross-examination. She said that MPP was manipulative in that she would say one thing and do the complete opposite. She also said there were many times she would lie, and that she never knew whether to believe her or not. 
 

 Crown counsel also asked about the argument t the skate park. She testified that everyone, including MPP, were yelling at her because it was her idea to go to the skate park and then the police found the car.
Issue
 

 After a proper assessment of the credibility and reliability of the two Crown witnesses who testified at trial, has the Crown proven beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused committed the offence of sexual interference as alleged in the Information?
Law and Analysis
Relevant Legislation
 

 Sections 150.1(1) and 151 of the Criminal Code state as follows:
150.1(1) Subject to subsections (2) to (2.2), when an accused is charged with an offence under section 151 or 152 or subsection 153(1), 160(3) or 173(2) or is charged with an offence under section 271, 272 or 273 in respect of a complainant under the age of 16 years, it is not a defence that the complainant consented to the activity that forms the subject-matter of the charge.
151 Every person who, for a sexual purpose, touches, directly or indirectly, with a part of the body or with an object, any part of the body of a person under the age of 16 years 
(a)
is guilty of an indicatable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than 14 years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of one year; or 
(b) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction and is liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than two years less a day and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of 90 days.
Case Law – Applicable Principle
Element of the Offence of Sexual Interference
 

 in R v BJT, 2019 ONCA 694, Feldman, JA, delivering the judgment of the Court, at para. 37 succinctly summed up the elements of the offence as follows:
 The offence of sexual interference under s. 151 of the Criminal Code is made out when the accused, for a sexual purpose, directly or indirectly touches the body of a person who is under 16 years old. It is a specific intent offence, meaning that the offender must specifically intend that the touching is for a sexual purpose. The offender may also have another purpose or reason for the touching, but if he or she also has a sexual purpose, the offence is made out.
Assessment of the Credibility and Reliability of Witnesses
 

 In R v M.(A.), 2014 ONCA 769, the Court at paras. 8-20 stated as follows:
The governing principles
Several basic principles inform our decision regarding the trial judge's reasons for judgment.
First, every witness, irrespective of age, is an individual whose credibility and evidence should be assessed according to criteria appropriate to his or her mental development, understanding and ability to communicate: R. v. W. (R.), 1992 CanLII 56 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 122, S.C.J. No. 56, at p. 134 S.C.R.
Second, no inflexible rules mandate when a witness' evidence should be evaluated according to “adult” or “child” standards. Indeed, in its provisions regarding testimonial capacity, the Canada Evidence Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. C-5 eschews any reference to “adult” or “child”, preferring the terms “14 years or older” and “under 14 years of age”. An inflexible, category-based system would resurrect stereotypes as rigid and unyielding as those rejected by the recent developments in our approach to children's evidence: W. (R.), at p. 134 S.C.R.
Third, despite this flexibility, there are some guiding principles. Generally, where an adult testifies about events that occurred when she was a child, her credibility should be assessed according to the criteria applicable to adult witnesses. However, the presence of inconsistencies, especially on peripheral matters such as time and location, should be considered in the context of her age at the time the events about which she is testifying occurred: W. (R.), at p. 134 S.C.R. See, also, R. v. Kendall, 1962 CanLII 7 (SCC), S.C.R. 469, S.C.J. No. 27.
Fourth, one of the most valuable means of assessing witness credibility is to examine the consistency between what the witness said in the witness box and what she has said on other occasions, whether or not under oath: R. v. G. (M.), 1994 CanLII 8733 (ON CA), O.J. No. 2086, 93 C.C.C. (3d) 347 (C.A.), at p. 354 C.C.C., leave to appeal to S.C.C. refused S.C.C.A. No. 390. Inconsistencies may emerge in a witness' testimony at trial, or between their trial testimony and statements previously given. Inconsistencies [page540] may also emerge from things said differently at different times, or from omitting to refer to certain events at one time while referring to them on other occasions.
Inconsistencies vary in their nature and importance. Some are minor, others are not. Some concern material issues, others peripheral subjects. Where an inconsistency involves something material about which an honest witness is unlikely to be mistaken, the inconsistency may demonstrate a carelessness with the truth about which the trier of fact should be concerned: G. (M.), at p. 354 C.C.C.
Fifth, a trial judge giving reasons for judgment is neither under the obligation to review and resolve every inconsistency in a witness' evidence, nor respond to every argument advanced by counsel: R. v. M. (R.E.), 3 S.C.R. 3, S.C.J. No. 52, 2008 SCC 51, at para. 64. That said, a trial judge should address and explain how she or he has resolved major inconsistencies in the evidence of material witnesses: G. (M.), at p. 356 C.C.C.; R. v. Dinardo, 1 S.C.R. 788, S.C.J. No, 24, 2008 SCC 24, at para. 31.
Sixth, prior consistent statements of a witness are not admissible for their truth: R. v. Stirling, 1 S.C.R. 272, S.C.J. No. 10, 2008 SCC 10, at para. 7. Mere repetition of a story on a prior occasion does not make the in-court description of the events any more credible or reliable: R. v. Curto, O.J. No. 889, 2008 ONCA 161, 230 C.C.C. (3d) 145, at paras. 32, 35; R. v. Ay, 1994 CanLII 8749 (BC CA), B.C.J. No. 2024, 93 C.C.C. (3d) 456 (C.A.), at p. 471 C.C.C.
Seventh, in reviewing reasons for sufficiency, we must ask ourselves whether the reasons, taken as a whole and considered with
-- the evidentiary record;
-- the submissions of counsel; and
-- the live issues at trial
reveal the basis for the verdict reached: M.(R.E.), at para. 55; R. v. Vuradin, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 639, [2013] S.C.J. No. 38, 2013 SCC 38, at paras. 12, 15.
Eighth, where a case turns largely on determinations of credibility, the sufficiency of reasons must be considered in light of the deference generally afforded to trial judges on credibility findings. It is rare for deficiencies in a trial judge's credibility analysis, as expressed in the reasons for judgment, to warrant appellate intervention: Vuradin, at para. 11; Dinardo, at para. 26. [page541]
Nevertheless, the failure of a trial judge to sufficiently articulate how credibility and reliability concerns are resolved may constitute reversible error: Vuradin, at para. 11; Dinardo, at para. 26; R. v. Braich, 1 S.C.R. 903, S.C.J. No. 29, 2002 SCC 27, at para. 23. After all, an accused is entitled to know why the trial judge had no reasonable doubt about his or her guilt: R. v. Gagnon, 1 S.C.R. 621, S.C.J. No. 17, 2006 SCC 17, at para. 21.
Similarly, we take it as self-evident that a legal error made in the assessment of credibility may displace the deference usually afforded to a trial judge's credibility assessment and may require appellate intervention.
Finally, when evaluating a trial judge's credibility analysis, there is no principled reason to distinguish between cases involving oath against oath from those in which no competing oath has been offered.
 

 In R v D.S., 2015 ABPC 159, this Court summarized some helpful guidelines to assist in the assessment of the credibility and reliability of witnesses at para. 61 as follows:
1.

The issue of credibility is one of fact and cannot be determined by following a set of rules that have the force of law.
2.

The general integrity and intelligence of the witness, his power to observe, his capacity to remember and his accuracy in statement are important.
3.

Was the witness honestly endeavouring to tell the truth? Was he sincere and frank, or was he biased, non-responsive, reticent and/or evasive?
4.

Was the evidence given by the witness reasonable and consistent in itself or self-contradictory?
5.

Was the witness shaken on cross-examination? Did the witness make any prior inconsistent statements?
6.

Although the demeanor of a witness in the witness box is a factor that should be considered, it is wrong to equate credible demeanour with reliability and accuracy particularly where there is significant evidence contradicting the witness. All the evidence must be considered. Just because the witness is credible does not mean that his evidence is reliable.
 

 Finally, the distinction between the credibility and reliability of witnesses is important to this case.
 

 In R v G.F., 2021 SC 20, Karaktasanis J., delivering the majority judgment of the Court at para. 82 stated as follows:
 

 Credibility findings must also be assessed in light of the presumption of the correct application of the law, particularly regarding the relationship between reliability and credibility. The jurisprudence often stresses the distinction between reliability and credibility, equating reliability with the witness’ ability to observe, recall, and recount events accurately, and referring to credibility as the witness’ sincerity or honesty: see, e.g., R. v. H.C., 2009 ONCA 56, 244 O.A.C. 288, at para. 41. However, under a functional and contextual reading of trial reasons, appellate courts should consider not whether the trial judge specifically used the words “credibility” and “reliability” but whether the trial judge turned their mind to the relevant factors that go to the believability of the evidence in the factual context of the case, including truthfulness and accuracy concerns. A trial judge’s determination to accept or believe inculpatory witness evidence includes an implicit assessment of truthfulness or sincerity and accuracy or reliability: Vuradin, at para. 16. Often, the term “credibility” is used in this broader sense to mean the believability of the evidence and it necessarily includes both truthfulness and accuracy: McWilliams’ Canadian Criminal Evidence (5th ed. (loose-leaf)), vol. 3, at pp. 30‑1 and 30‑2. For example, Black’s Law Dictionary (11th ed. 2019), at p. 463, defines credibility as “[t]he quality that makes something (as a witness or some evidence) worthy of belief” and model jury instructions include both truthfulness and accuracy within “credibility” assessments: G. A. Ferguson and M. R. Dambrot, CRIMJI: Canadian Criminal Jury Instructions (4th ed. (loose‑leaf)). Provided trial judges turn their mind to these considerations, there is no requirement that they utter the word “reliable”.
Proof Beyond a Reasonable Doubt
 

 The SCC has dealt with the traditional language of proof beyond a reasonable doubt in the following cases: R v Lifchus, (1997) 9 C.R. (5th) l; R v Starr, (2000) 2000 SCC 40 (CanLII), 147 CCC (3d) 449, and R v Squires, (2003) 2002 SCC 82 (CanLII), 171 CCC (3d) 226.
 

 In Lifchus, Cory J., at para. 39 stated as follows:

 Instructions pertaining to the requisite standard of proof in a criminal trial of proof beyond a reasonable doubt might be given along these lines:
The accused enters these proceedings presumed to be innocent. That presumption of innocence remains throughout the case until such time as the Crown has on the evidence put before you satisﬁed you beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused is guilty.
What does the expression “beyond a reasonable doubt” mean?
The term “beyond a reasonable doubt” has been used for a very long time and is part of our history and traditions of justice. It is so engrained in our criminal law that some think it needs no explanation, yet something must be said regarding its meaning.
A reasonable doubt is not an imaginary or frivolous doubt. It must not be based upon sympathy or prejudice. Rather, it is based on reason and commons sense. It is logically derived from the evidence or absence of evidence. 
Even if you believe the accused is probably guilty or likely guilty, that is not sufﬁcient. In those circumstances you must give the beneﬁt of the doubt to the accused an acquit because the Crown has failed to satisfy you of the guilt of the accused beyond a reasonable doubt.
On the other hand you must remember that it is virtually impossible to prove anything to an absolute certainty and the Crown is not required to do so. Such a standard of proof is impossibly high. 
In short if, based upon the evidence before the court, you are sure that the accused committed the offence you should convict since this demonstrates that you are satisﬁed on his guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
 Application of Principles
 

 In assessing the credibility of the complainant MMP in this case, her demeanour as a witness is of concern. Rather than projecting as a witness endeavouring to be truthful, she appeared to respond to questions with a tendency to prevaricate. It didn’t appear to me that she cared about telling the truth. She had a story fixed in her mind and that was what she conveyed to the Court.
 

 In assessing the reliability of the complainant MMP in this case, the Court cannot ignore the admission she made during the time frame of the alleged offence. She was using alcohol and drugs. She was addicted to cocaine. She craved cannabis to the point that during one of the alleged sexual encounters with the accused, she “greened out” or overdosed on its consumption. She admitted suffering memory lapses because of her alcohol and drug use. She admitted lying, not only to her mother, but to her friends. She lied to everyone around her so she could manipulate them. 
 

 In assessing both her credibility and reliability as a witness in this case, the Court also notes that her evidence as to the alleged sexual encounters with the accused is inconsistent with the evidence given by her female friend MCA. MCA gave no evidence of any sexual encounter between MPP and the accused. I have no reason not to accept the evidence given by MCA as being both credible and reliable. She did not suffer from the same drug addiction, loss of memory and manipulative behaviour displayed by the complainant.
 

 The critical end to the Court’s assessment of the credibility and reliability of MPP as a witness is her own admission on cross-examination by Defence Counsel that she lied not only in her interview with Detective Sarah MacDonald, but also to the Court to better her situation.
 

 I don’t think I need say more.
 

 The complainant MPP is neither a credible nor a reliable witness. 
 

 There being no other evidence in this case, on Count 1 contained in the Information, the accused is found not guilty.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/pc/2023abpc1.html
 



The accused is charged with assaulting causing bodily harm to a polling station volunteer at a school set up for voting on election day, September 20, 2021. He is also charged with mischief by interfering with the complainant in his duties at the polling station. The Crown called five witnesses, two from the school, the complainant and the two police officers who responded to the complaint. The defence called the accused.
Facts in Evidence
 



On election day, a polling station was set up at a school called Hidden Valley elementary school in Northwest Calgary. The school has 400 students ranging from kindergarten to grade 3. 
 



On the Friday before election day an administrative assistant at the school, not involved in the polling of votes, took a call from an individual asking if masks were required to vote. He called twice. The second call was on voting day. On each occasion he was referred to Elections Canada, not the school. Another call was received on election day around noon asking the same question, this time answered by the principal. She said there was signage, arrows and posters on the premises about masks. She asked an elections officer who confirmed masks were required and relayed this information to the caller. The caller argued with her and said there would be trouble if he had to wear a mask. He called her a fucking cunt. The presumption is that all three calls were made by the accused.
 



The principal had taken a number of grade one students outside in the courtyard where the entrance to the gym and voting centre was set up shortly after noon. She took them inside when she heard angry voices and shouting in the courtyard. She came back outside and saw the police were there. She arranged a soft lockdown because she was concerned there was a danger and kept everyone inside.
 



The complainant was working as an Information Officer at the polling station. He was standing outside the entrance door to the gym beside a table. His responsibility was to provide information to voters, making sure they had their voters’ cards or identification and to make sure they were wearing masks.
 



Around noon he noticed a man, the accused, coming towards him and the voting door to the gym without a mask. It was his job to inform him to wear a mask. He walked very fast and the complainant stood in front of him and greeted him and asked him to put a mask on before he went in. The accused did not slow down or make eye contact but when he got close to the complainant he punched him in the head on his right side. The complainant’s glasses flew off. The accused walked by him and said he had the right to vote without a mask on and walked in the door. The complainant suffered pain where he was punched in the head. It persisted and he went to emergency at the hospital that day and the next day. His glasses were broken beyond repair.
 



At the hospital it was determined he had a fractured nose and a concussion. As the concussion symptoms subsided, he began having vision problems and had to have vision therapy. He continued to have pain on the side of his head. He had to have plastic surgery on his nose as it was dislocated. His vision problems caused him to lose his job because he could not spend time in front of a computer that he needed to for functioning in his job. It caused massive headaches. He is now taking training for a different career not involving computers. He still suffers from the fracture, the concussion and his vision. 
 



The accused gave evidence that he indeed made the calls but could not remember how many. He did walk toward the door to the polling station where there was a table just outside the door with masks and sanitizers. He states the complainant abruptly came up behind him, got in front of him, put both hands on his stomach so the accused slapped him on the right side of his head. The complainant walked inside and the accused followed him, twice telling him he had absolutely no right to put his hands on him and not to ever do it again. He said the complainant never said anything to him at any time. The accused admits he was angry and he is an anti-masker.
The Law of Credibility
 



Clearly there are two versions before me on a number of issues going to credibility. When credibility is an issue it raises the Supreme Court of Canada case of R v WD, 15 SCR 742 (WD) and authorities following.
 
 
 
 

 In a case where the accused testifies and the issue is credibility, the rule of reasonable doubt applies to that issue. There are two situations where the court must acquit the accused. First, if the trier of fact believes the accused. Second, even if they do not believe the accused but his evidence raises a reasonable doubt as to his guilt when considered in the context of the evidence as a whole.
 

 The concept of reasonable doubt was explained by the Supreme Court in R v Lifchus, 1997 CanLII 319 (SCC), 3 SCR 320 (Lifchus). The standard of proof beyond a reasonable doubt is intertwined with the presumption of innocence. It is based on reason and common sense. It is logically connected to evidence or absence of evidence. It does not involve proof to an absolute certainty. It is not proof beyond any doubt, nor is it an imaginary or frivolous doubt. On the other hand, more is required than proof that the accused is probably guilty. If the conclusion is only that the accused is probably guilty, he must be acquitted.
 

 In 2019, the Alberta Court of Appeal handed down the case of R v Ryon, 2019 ABCA 36, (Ryon) where they reiterated not only that the accused evidence must be considered in the context of the evidence as a whole but that R v WD does not stand for the proposition that the 
accused’s evidence must be considered first. They adopted the approach proposed by Doherty J.A. in R v Carriere (2001), 2001 CanLII 8609 (ON CA), 151 OAC 115 (Ont. C.A.).
 

 They then referred to the Supreme Court case R v Dinardo, 2008 SCC 24 (Dinardo) as support for considering the accused’s evidence in the context of the evidence as a whole.
 

 It is only exculpatory evidence the instruction of W.D. applies to.
 

 In R v Achuil, 2019 ABCA 299, the Court of Appeal clarified its wording in Ryon regarding the second prong of WD.
 

 In assessing credibility there is no magic formula provided to triers of fact. Instead, there are a number of questions to be considered, for example, whether the witness seems to have a good memory of the relevant events, whether the evidence provided by a witness seems reasonable and consistent and whether there is any reason why a witness would not be telling the
truth. When assessing the evidence of the accused, it is impermissible to assume that the accused will lie to escape conviction, to do so would undermine the presumption of innocence, R v Laboucan, [2010] 1 SCR 379, at paras 14-18.
 

 In addition there are several authorities dealing with a bare denial by the accused or a different version by an accused.
 

 In R v Page, 2017 ABQB 33, Justice Renke, under the heading “Rejection of the Accused’s Account”, states that an accused’s account need not raise a reasonable doubt, even if that account was plausible and unshaken in cross-examination. He states a trier of fact may reject an accused’s plausible account wholly, because the trier of fact accepts the counter-account of the Crown’s evidence beyond a reasonable doubt. That is if the trier is convinced beyond a reasonable doubt by the Crown’s evidence and no reasonable doubt arises from the evidence that the trier accepts. He refers to R v Vuradin, 2013 SCC 38 (Vuradin) as well as R v Gordon, 2015 ABCA 341; and R v (S(T), 2012 ONCA 289 by Watt J.A.
 

 In Vuradin the Supreme Court stated the trial judge found the complainant’s evidence compelling and accepted her evidence where it conflicted with the evidence of the accused. They then stated at para. 19:
...No further explanation for rejecting the appellant’s evidence was required.
 

 In R v CLS, 2021 ABCA 147 the court stated the trial judge did not reject the accused’s evidence because it was a bare denial. He disbelieved his evidence because it conflicted with the balance of the Crown’s evidence, including the complainant’s. It did not raise a reasonable doubt because it was inconsistent with the complainant’s evidence which he accepted as credible. He does not need to find fault with the accused’s evidence in order to convict.
 

 In R v TS, 2012 ONCA 289 (Ont. CA), Justice Watt stated at paragraph 79 as follows:
As a matter of law, reasoned acceptance of a complainant’s evidence is a basis upon which a trial judge can reject the evidence of an accused and find guilt proven beyond a reasonable doubt. A reasoned and considered acceptance of the complainant’s evidence is as much an explanation for rejecting the contrary evidence of an accused as are problems inherent in an accused’s own testimony:
Analysis
 

 I choose to analyze the evidence of the complainant first. I found him to be mild mannered, respectful and anything but aggressive. He had a good memory and only testified to what he knew and could remember. He saw the accused approaching from some distance and at a fast and determined pace. He did not slow down as he approached him. He was not wearing a mask and it was his function to intercept him and advise him he needed to wear a mask to enter the polling station. He recalls getting in front of him for that purpose. The next thing he knew he was hit on the side of the head. He was unsure whether it was the accused’s closed fist or an open hand. From the strength and power of the blow he assumed it had to be a closed fist. He could have just said it was a closed fist but he did not because he did not see it coming. It came out of nowhere. This tells me he only testified to what he saw and knew and did not embellish anything. These are factors in determining his credibility.
 

 In cross-examination, the accused’s version was put to him that he came up behind the accused, ran around in front of him and placed his hands on his stomach area and pushed him. This was put to him on a number of occasions and on each occasion he denied that happened. He was standing by the table when the accused approached. Finally, after several denials he said, “I was always in front of him. I was never on the side. I was never from behind. I never touched him. We never had a conversation either.” This strikes me as very credible and reliable evidence. It was factual and without equivocation.
 

 It was then put to him that he was slapped, not punched. He again was adamant that he was punched. He based that on the pain he endured and the resulting injuries he suffered.
 

 The complainant was able to describe in detail the injuries he suffered and the continuing pain he suffers to this day which resulted in him losing his job all because of the actions of the accused.
 
 
 
 

 I found the complainant to be highly credible and honest and I accept his evidence and his version of the incident entirely.
 

 I turn now to the version of the accused. First of all he admits he made the phone calls but he does not remember how many times he called. I accept the evidence of the school personnel that there were three calls and they came from the same person. I also accept that on election day he told them that if he had to wear a mask there would be trouble. His use of foul language give me the impression he approached the polling station with an attitude. He did not deny that he walked quickly toward the polling station entrance toward the table.
 

 His version that the complainant came up from behind him defies all logic and credulity. The complainant’s station was by the table outside the door where the accused was approaching. How could he possibly be behind the fast approaching accused? How could the accused even see him if he was behind him? His version is the complainant somehow came around in front of him from behind and immediately placed his hands on the front of the accused and pushed him. The accused immediately slapped him on the side of the head.
 

 I agree with the complainant this was no slap. A slap could not have caused the extensive damage the complainant suffered. It had to be a punch with some considerable force behind it. I find the accused’s version that he slapped him to be not credible.
 

 I also take into account the difference in size of the two men. The accused is a large man whereas the complainant is slight in stature and much smaller. He was at a distinct disadvantage and never saw the blow coming by either version.
 

 I find the accused’s version is not credible nor reliable and is invented to justify his actions.
 

 The defence raises self-defence but any such defence or justifications for assaulting the complainant is based on my accepting the accused’s version which I do not. Even if I did, the actions of the accused are so excessive compared to what he complains the complainant did, there would be no such defence available.
Conclusion
 

 I accept the evidence of the complainant as credible and truthful as to what happened. I reject the version of the accused as made up and untruthful. I find him guilty of assault causing bodily harm.
 
 
 
 

 I do not find evidence supporting count two of mischief, nor have I heard any submissions of it by either counsel. If the Crown is submitting that count has been proven, I will hear further submissions.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/pc/2023abpc8.html
 



On Information 221135031P1, Mr. Kruger is charged as follows:
Count 1: On or about the 22nd day of July, 2022, at or near Calgary, Alberta, did unlawfully wound, maim, disfigure, or endanger the life of Kelly Okeynan, thereby committing an aggravated assault, contrary to section 268 of the Criminal Code of Canada.
Count 2: On or about the 11th day of August, 2022, at or near Calgary, Alberta, did unlawfully assault Kelly Okeynan, contrary to section 266 of the Criminal Code of Canada. 
Count 3: On or about the 11th day of August, 2022, at or near Calgary, Alberta, did wrongfully and without lawful authority, for the purpose of compelling Kelly Okeynan to abstain from doing anything that he or she had a lawful right to do, or to do anything that he or she has a lawful right to abstain from doing, use violence or threats of violence to that person or their intimate partner or children, or injure the person’s property, contrary to section 423(1)(a) of the Criminal Code of Canada. 
 



The Crown proceeded by way of indictment. Mr. Kruger elected trial in the Provincial Court of Alberta and pleaded “not guilty”. 
 



Mr. Kruger has applied, relying on section 591(3)(a) of the Criminal Code, for an order that he be tried on count 1 separately from counts 2 and 3.
 



I granted that application on January 9, 2023 and promised written reasons for that decision. These are those Reasons.
 



A reference in these Reasons to a section number is, unless the contrary is stated, a reference to that section in the Criminal Code.
Analysis
 



Section 591(3)(a) states:
“(3) The court may, where it is satisfied that the interests of justice so require, order (a) that the accused or defendant be tried separately on one or more of the counts….”
 



“A motion to sever under s. 591(3)(a) of the Code must be brought by the accused, who bears the burden of establishing on a balance of probabilities that the interests of justice require an order for severance”: R. v. Arp 1998 CanLII 769 (SCC), 3 SCR 339, at paragraph 52.
 



In 2009, the Supreme Court of Canada set out a non-exhaustive list of factors to be considered by a court as it works towards determining whether a particular applicant has met his or her onus under the section. At paragraphs 16-18 of R. v. Last 2009 SCC 45 (CanLII), 3 SCR 146, Justice Deschamp, speaking for the entire panel of the Court, said:
The ultimate question faced by a trial judge in deciding whether to grant a severance application is whether severance is required in the interests of justice, as per s. 591(3) of the Code. The interests of justice encompass the accused’s right to be tried on the evidence admissible against him, as well as society’s interest in seeing that justice is done in a reasonably efficient and cost-effective manner. The obvious risk when counts are tried together is that the evidence admissible on one count will influence the verdict on an unrelated count.
Courts have given shape to the broad criteria established in s. 591(3) and have identified factors that can be weighed when deciding whether to sever or not. The weighing exercise ensures that a reasonable balance is struck between the risk of prejudice to the accused and the public interest in a single trial. It is important to recall that the interests of justice often call for a joint trial. Litchfield, where the Crown was prevented from arguing the case properly because of an unjudicial severance order, is but one such example. Severance can impair not only efficiency but the truth-seeking function of the trial.
The factors identified by the courts are not exhaustive. They simply help capture how the interests of justice may be served in a particular case, avoiding an injustice. Factors courts rightly use include: the general prejudice to the accused; the legal and factual nexus between the counts; the complexity of the evidence; whether the accused intends to testify on one count but not another; the possibility of inconsistent verdicts; the desire to avoid a multiplicity of proceedings; the use of similar fact evidence at trial; the length of the trial having regard to the evidence to be called; the potential prejudice to the accused with respect to the right to be tried within a reasonable time; and the existence of antagonistic defences as between co‑accused persons: R. v. E. (L.) (1994), 1994 CanLII 1785 (ON CA), 94 C.C.C. (3d) 228 (Ont. C.A.), at p. 238; R. v. Cross (1996), 1996 CanLII 5992 (QC CA), 112 C.C.C. (3d) 410 (Que. C.A.), at p. 419; R. v. Cuthbert (1996), 1996 CanLII 8341 (BC CA), 106 C.C.C. (3d) 28 (B.C.C.A.), at para. 9, aff’d 1997 CanLII 397 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 8 (sub nom. R. v. C. (D.A.)).
 



In the case at bar, there are two sets of allegations. Very briefly stated, there is an allegation that on July 22, 2022, the accused used a weapon in assaulting the complainant (Count 1). There is an allegation that on August 11, 2022, the accused assaulted the complainant, and threatened him (Counts 2 and 3). On that occasion, it is alleged that the accused called the complainant “a rat”.
 

 The issues raised by the accused in support of his application to sever count 1 from counts 2 and 3 are as follows:
(1) If the accused were to testify, and if the trier of fact found him not to be credible in relation to the July 22 allegations, might that finding improperly affect the trier of fact’s assessment of the accused’s credibility in relation to the August 11 allegations? This will be a judge alone trial. Judges are experienced in applying the rules of evidence. As stated in R. v. JCL 2012 ONSC 6603 at paragraph 15: “…Although the risk of tainted reasoning exists, where there is a judge alone trial as here, it is largely minimized.” In R. v. JCL, supra, Justice Hennessy concluded (at paragraph 44): “The defendant has shown there is some risk of prejudice arising from the possibility of tainted reasoning. There is no reason to entertain this risk when there are no obvious or at best minimal benefits to a joint trial. Where there are minimal benefits arising from a joint trial and some risk of prejudice to the accused arising from a joint trial, it is in the interests of justice to sever the counts as requested by the defendant.” In the case at bar, I find that the risk of tainted reasoning in relation to credibility to be very low.
(2) Counsel for the accused submitted that “it is anticipated that Mr. Kruger will testify with respect to the aggravated assault charge…and articulate a defence of self-defence. It is not anticipated that Mr. Kruger will give evidence with respect to the acts complained of under Counts 2 and 3….”. I respectfully adopt the comments of Justice Yamauchi in R. v. Cooper 2011 ABQB 316, at paragraph 57: “The Applicant’s stated intention to testify on one count but not another is a fact that deserves significant weight. However, it is not determinative in a severance application: Last at para 27. This Court must decide whether that stated intention is objectively justifiable or, even if it is, whether this stated intention is outweighed by other factors that show that the interests of justice require a joint trial: Cross at paras 49-54. Last at para. 26, reminds us that ‘[t]he burden on the accused is to provide the trial judge with sufficient information to convey that, objectively, there is substance to his testimonial intention.’ The Applicant has met that requirement.” In the case at bar, I too am satisfied that the accused’s stated “testimonial intention” is objectively reasonable. Requiring the accused to have one trial in respect of all three counts on the Information will likely require him to make a choice between his section 11(c) Charter right to silence in respect of counts 2 and 3, and his section 650(3) right to make full answer and defence in respect of count 1. I make one additional comment on this aspect of the severance application. The Crown submitted that I could address the accused’s concerns by restricting the Crown’s ability to cross-examine the accused; that is, I could prevent the Crown from cross-examining the accused on matters related to Counts 2 and 3. With respect, I am of the view that such an approach would be troublesome. First, as will be seen below, the Crown sees a connection between Count 1 and Counts 2 and 3. It would therefore be difficult for the Crown to treat these matters as watertight compartments. Second, the right of cross-examination is to be jealously guarded (see: R. v. Lyttle 2004 SCC 5; R. v. Shearing 2002 SCC 58; R. v. AJR [1994] 2 OR (3d) 405 (ONCA); R. v. Fast 2022 ABCA 33). An improper restriction of the right to cross-examine will often lead to an order for a new trial: R. v. RV 2019 SCC 41. In the case at bar, there seems to be no compelling reason to artificially restrict the Crown’s right to cross-examine when there is an alternate, and, in this case, not disruptive, course of action (severance of the counts) which will preserve both the rights of the accused and the Crown.
 

 The Crown submitted that there are other concerns which weigh against granting a severance order:
(1) The similarities between (a) the events alleged in Count 1, and (b) the events alleged in Counts 2 and 3, are that the accused and the complainant are the same. The Crown submitted that the utterance of the word “rat” by the accused towards the complainant referred to the incident alleged in Count 1. The Crown submitted (in its written material): “The Crown cannot prove the essential element of intent in relation to count 3 without making reference to count 1. It is necessary for the Court to have context in order to understand what is being alleged. The essential element of count 3 relates to count 1 in examining mens rea of the accused when he allegedly referred to the victim as a ‘rat’ prior to the assault…The Crown does not advance the factual connection between these counts based on similar fact evidence. Rather the reliability of the evidence pertains to extrinsic misconduct in order to establish intent on count 3 and challenge credibility on count 1 (should the accused advance that defence).” In my view, holding a trial for Count 1 separate from the trial held for Counts 2 and 3 will neither prevent, nor greatly inconvenience, the Crown in the effective prosecution of these matters. Evidence of “context” can be easily led in a trial on Counts 2 and 3. 
(2) Two trials will take longer than one trial. That may be true, but, in the facts of this case, the additional time needed for two trials is not significant. 
 

 To be complete, I note that the Crown has fairly noted that it does not intend to rely on similar fact evidence. I also note that in the facts of this case, there is no concern about inconsistent verdicts.
 

 When I assess all the relevant factors, I am satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, that it is in the interests of justice that count 1 be severed from counts 2 and 3. An order for severance will not materially inconvenience either the Crown or the Court system, and it will protect the accused’s right to make full answer in defence, and to exercise his rights under section 11(c) of the Charter.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/ab/pc/2023abpc6.html
 



Mr. Pandit (Pandit) pled guilty to two counts of fraud over $5000. The first offence involved one complainant, Saraswati Singh (Dr. Singh) and the second offence involved two complainants, Harman Bhatti and Jaskaran Bhatti. Both offences occurred between June 1, 2017 and July 31, 2018. 
 



Entered as Exhibit S#1 was an Agreed Statement of Facts (ASF). 
 



One of the complainants, Dr. Singh, was the owner of several businesses. He employed Pandit as a bookkeeper between 2016 and 2018. Pandit had access to all Dr. Singh’s business banking records
 



The second complainant, Mr. Jaskaran Bhatti, is the owner of Preet Janitorial. He employed Pandit as his bookkeeper from 2013. 
 



The final complainant, Mr. Harman Bhatti, is Jaskaran Bhatti’s son, who owned Aim Janitorial. He had also employed Pandit as a bookkeeper for his business since 2013. 
 



On June 14, 2017, Pandit opened a bank account at the Bank of Nova Scotia, which I will refer to as the Pandit Account.
 



During the relevant time, Pandit acquired 91 cheques from Dr. Singh, which he then diverted into the Pandit Account, thereby misappropriating the funds for his own use. The total of the 91 cheques was $238,000.
 



In relation to Mr. Jaskaran Bhatti, Pandit took 21 cheques from Preet Janitorial and diverted them into the Pandit Account, the total amount taken was $105,246.
 



Pandit took 23 cheques from Mr. Harman Bhatti, for a total of $99,600.
 

 Pandit did not cease his criminal behavior until it was detected, and his employment was terminated. 
 

 The total funds misappropriated by Pandit from the 3 complainants was $443,206.
 

 After Pandit was arrested, he made full restitution to Jaskaran Bhatti and Harman Bhatti, by means of transferring a property to Jaskaran Bhatti, who then reimbursed his son for his losses 
 

Dr. Singh filed a civil action against Pandit on September 7, 2020. Subsequently, a Settlement Agreement was reached. As a result, the Crown is not seeking any further restitution on behalf of any of the complainants
 

 The following were entered as Exhibits at the sentencing hearing:
S#1 – Agreed Statement of Facts
S#2 – Defense Book of Supporting Documents (which included Tabs 1-8).
S#3 – Victim Impact Statement (VIS) provided directly to the Crown by Dr. Singh (excised).
S#4 – Unexcised VIS that was filed with the Court by Dr. Singh (confirmed to be the same VIS as S#3).
S#5 – Restitution request provided by Dr. Singh that the Crown advised they would not be seeking
S#6 – Hansard Excerpts from the House of Commons and House of Senate Debates
S#7- Letter of support authored by Punita Pandit, wife of the accused.
 
II. Pandit’s Personal Antecedents
 
 

 Pandit is 49 years old. He was born in India and immigrated to the United States in 2000, and later moved to Edmonton in 2007. Pandit is married with two daughters, ages 16 and 17. He received his Bachelor and Master of Commerce at the University of Bombay, followed by his Bachelor of Law at the same university.
 

 In reviewing his “Statement of Personal Background” which was included in Exhibit #2 at Tab 1, Pandit was employed as an accountant for several different companies and organizations continually since 2000. While employed with the Bhatti family from 2013 to 2018, Pandit was had employment with Little Einstein Daycare and Dr. Singh. I further note that Pandit is presently gainfully employed as payroll administrator for a construction company. 
 

 Pandit has no prior criminal record.
 

 Pandit claims to have a history of significant mental health issues, including depression, anxiety, and alcohol abuse.
 

 Included within Tab 3 of Exhibit S#2 was an alcohol/drug assessment prepared by Christopher Suchit, Addictions Counselor. Pandit was diagnosed as having “engaged in alcohol consumption at the Dependence Level”. (Page 5 of report). Both counsel agreed that Mr. Suchit was not qualified to provide an opinion on Pandit’s level of risk to reoffend, but no issue was taken regarding the diagnosis itself. 
 

 Submissions were made to suggest that Pandit had suffered a stroke in 2016 which significantly affected his health. After sentencing submissions were made, Defense counsel, with the consent of the Crown, forwarded an email to the Court with an attachment. The attachment was a letter dated Dec. 23, 2022 and authored by Dr. Hamza Alqaser, Family Physician with the Sturgeon Medical Clinic. The letter states: “This is to certify that Girish Pandit had CT exam last 2016 and results shown that he had stroke.” Although this was not entered as an exhibit at the time of the sentencing submissions, counsel advised it was their intention to have this letter marked as a formal exhibit on the next court appearance. As such, this document will become Exhibit S#8.
III. Positions of the Parties
 
 

 These are indictable offences. The maximum jail sentence is 14 years’ incarceration. 
 

 The Crown seeks a sentence of 2 years’ incarceration. 
 

 Additionally, the Crown seeks an ancillary order pursuant to s 380.2 of the Criminal Code (CC) prohibiting Pandit from seeking, obtaining, or continuing any employment or becoming or being a volunteer in any capacity, that involves having authority over the real property, money or valuable security of another person. 
 

 As already mentioned, no further restitution order in being requested.
 

 The Accused argues that the appropriate sentence is an 18-month Conditional Sentence Order (CSO). 
 
IV. Principles of Sentencing
 
A. Objectives of Sentencing
 

 The Criminal Code (CC) says that the fundamental purpose of sentencing is to “...contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions that have one or more...” of the objectives set out in s 718 of the CC.Those enumerated objectives are denunciation, deterrence, rehabilitation, reparation, to promote a sense of responsibility in the offender and acknowledgment of harm done, and to separate the offender where necessary, bearing in mind that s 718.2(d) and (e) CC states that one should not be deprived of liberty, if less restrictive sanctions are appropriate. 
 

 There is no doubt that denunciation and deterrence are important sentencing objectives when sentencing Pandit for these offences of fraud over $5000. These are serious crimes 
 

 Our Court of Appeal in R v Fulcher, 2007 ABCA 381 (Fulcher) at para 27 and R v Oliphant (1995), 1995 ABCA 492 (Oliphant) at para 5 clearly stated that in cases of embezzlement, general deterrence is of overwhelming importance.
 

 In response to the proclamation that general deterrence is of overwhelming importance in embezzlement cases, Defense cited the recent decision in R v Bissonnette, 2022 SCC 23 (Bissonnette) as support for the proposition that using incarceration as a means of achieving general deterrence is questionable. Defense referred to para 47 which reads:
…General deterrence is an objective that must be weighed by a court, but the effectiveness of which has often been questioned. These legitimate reservations notwithstanding, the fact remains that the certainty of punishment, together with the entire range of criminal sanctions, does produce a certain deterrent effect, albeit one that is difficult to evaluate, on possible offenders (Ruby, at s 1.31; Canadian Sentencing Commission, Sentencing Reform: A Canadian Approach (1987), at pp. 136-38). 
 

 Bissonnette involved an offender who opened fire on a Mosque full of worshippers, killing six people and seriously injuring five more. The accused pled guilty to the 12 counts against him, including six counts of first-degree murder. First degree murder carries a mandatory life sentence with parole eligibility only after an offender has served 25 years. The Crown requested that s 745.51 CC apply. This provision authorized a Court to order that the periods without eligibility for parole be served consecutively. Bissonnette challenged the constitutionality of s 745.51 CC, arguing it breached his rights protected under ss 7 and 12 of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms (Charter) and that it was not saved by s 1. The Court agreed and found s 745.51 CC unconstitutional.
 
 

 I wholeheartedly agree with the Courts’ comments concerning the effectiveness of general deterrence. The Court in Bissonnette commented: “[g]eneral deterrence is an objective that must be weighed by a court, but the effectiveness of which has often been questioned.” However, the Court did not say that general deterrence was obsolete and no longer played any role in sentencing an offender. In fact, the Court went on to say: “These legitimate reservations notwithstanding, the fact remains that the certainty of punishment, together with the entire range of criminal sanctions, does produce a certain deterrent effect, albeit one that is difficult to evaluate, on possible offenders” (Bissonnette at para 47).
 

 I find that the objective of general deterrence can have more or less impact, depending on the offender and type of offence committed. 
 

 As stated in several authoritative cases, offenders who commit white collar crime engage in a process of weighing the risks and benefits and will roughly calculate the odds. If jail is unlikely, then embezzlement may look like an attractive business proposition. The more likely they are to be incarcerated if caught, the more they are likely to be deterred. (R v Bracegirdle, 2004 ABCA 252 (Bracegirdle) at para 34; R v McKinnon, 2005 ABCA 8 (McKinnon) at para 61). 
 

 As stated by the Court in McKinnon at paras 59-63 and Fulcher at para 27, general deterrence is of overwhelming importance in cases of systematic embezzlement from employers. At para 44, the Court in Fulcher continued by saying:
In crimes of embezzlement, the sentencing goals of denunciation and deterrence take on a particular importance. If this conditional sentence order were left standing, anyone else working in a similar capacity of trust for a similar employer could readily see an obvious blueprint for quick wealth. It shows how to get hundreds of thousands of dollars almost effortlessly with only the potential burden of a conditional sentence of house arrest to fear.
 

 Further, the Court in Fulcher commented that it is common for offenders who commit these types of offences to come before the court with no prior criminal record, thus diminishing the need for further individual deterrence. However, as the Court stated at para 29, “that in no way detracts from the need for general deterrence.” 
 

 Incarceration may not be as effective in meeting the objective of general deterrence when we are sentencing an unsophisticated offender for an impulsive offence committed in the heat of the moment. However, when sentencing a well-educated offender who has over time committed an offence that took planning and deliberation, general deterrence carries more weight. (McKinnon at paras 60-63; Bracegirdle at para 34)
 

 In this case the objectives which are paramount are denunciation and deterrence, and while rehabilitation is always something a Court needs to consider, such a consideration will depend on the offence and the offender. I will come back to rehabilitation later in this decision. 
 
B. Proportionality
 
 

 As stated by the Court in Bissonnette: “sentencing must in all circumstances be guided by the cardinal principle of proportionality. The sentence must be severe enough to denounce the offence but must not exceed “what is just and appropriate, given the moral blameworthiness of the offender and the gravity of the offence” (at para 50). 
 

 This principle is also legislated pursuant to s 718.1 CC which states that “[a] sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.”
 

 Pandit’s offences were not impulsive crimes committed in the heat of the moment, nor could either of these offences be described as one-off crimes of opportunity. Fraud of this nature is sophisticated, planned, and deliberate. Pandit abused a position of trust, which both case law and s 718.2 CC has deemed to be an aggravating factor. Pandit misappropriated funds over a period of 13 months involving multiple transactions, the value of the fraud was significant (amounting to over $440K), and the frauds involved three separate victims Pandit never ceased until he was caught, and despite being advised that he was suffering with financial difficulties, I find that the offences were motived by greed. 
 

 No evidence was tendered as to what Pandit did with the misappropriated funds. However, his ability to promptly transfer a property to pay the Bhatti family the money he had misappropriated, is telling. A further indicator that Pandit was not in financial ruin at the time of committing these offences, is the fact that in 2020, when Dr. Singh filed a Statement of Claim against Pandit, he also filed 13 Certificates of Lis Pendens against property that Pandit or Pandit’s numbered company owned. Some of these properties may have been encumbered, but a man with 13 properties who appropriates close to a half a million dollars is acting out of greed.
 

 There is evidence to suggest that Pandit lives with alcohol dependency. I will accept that his dependency could have predated the commission of these offences. However, as stated in R v McTighe, 2005 ABCA 30 (McTighe) at para 18: addiction is not to be considered a mitigating factor, nor an extenuating circumstance.
 

 There was a suggestion that Pandit lives with mental health issues. However, there was no evidence to suggest his mental health issues impacted his offending behavior. Within Exhibit S#2 at Tabs 4 through 6 were medical documents from Alberta Health Services revealing that Pandit was admitted to hospital on November 22, 2019, for a suicide attempt. All medical documents provided relating to Pandit’s mental health post-dated his offending behavior. Included within Exhibit S#2, Tab 6, is a document dated December 13, 2019, titled “AHE Day Hospital Admission Note”. At page 1 of 5, under the heading “Psychiatric History” it reads: 
Client reports his difficulties began Nov 21, 2019 – when he was called by police and asked to go into station. Client did so and was then arrested and kept in cells/an interview room for 18 hours. Reports he was charged with embezzlement in relation to a job he had in 2017 – reports the police presented him with evidence, denies all accusations He reports that while in holding [cells] he made the decision to end his life. 
 

 In relation to any physical ailment that Pandit may have suffered with, and which could have impacted his moral culpability, I have evidence that a CT scan was done on Pandit in 2016 which indicated he had suffered a stroke. I have no evidence as to the severity of the stroke, or even when he had suffered the stroke. However, I do know that based on Pandit’s employment record which was provided in Exhibit #2, Tab 1, Pandit was gainfully employed continuously from 2000 to 2018. As such, there is no indication that the stroke had any profound effect on Pandit’s ability to earn an income. In fact, it was during this same time that Pandit was employed as an accountant for Dr. Singh, Jaskaran Bhatti, and Harman Bhatti. 
 

 In assessing proportionality, I find the offences Pandit committed were serious and his moral culpability falls on the high end of the moral culpability spectrum.
 

 As for mitigating factors not considered in the proportionality analysis, Pandit’s guilty plea is mitigating. 
 

 Restitution is also mitigating. However, while an offender should be given some credit for significant and prompt restitution, that should not be gilded as voluntary, nor as reliable proof of repentance or remorse. Any competent counsel would tell their client that restitution is likely one of the few mitigating factors to be considered in sentencing. (McKinnon at paras 88-91).
 

 The Court continued, stating: 
The sentence should be lower than it would have been without restitution, but it should not be radically different. (McKinnon at para 92).
 

 As for aggravating factors, pursuant to s 718.2(a)(iii) CC, Pandit abused a position of trust to commit these offences; further s 380.1 CC, sets out several factors that are to be considered as aggravating when sentencing an offender who commits fraud. Although I mention these, I have already considered these statutorily aggravating factors in the proportionality assessment. As such, I will not double count them under the heading of additional aggravating or statutorily aggravating factors
 
 
C. Parity
 
 

 Counsel supplied me with a plethora of case law. 
 

 Prior to reviewing the relevant cases I wish to make a few comments
 

 Defense counsel argued that a CSO was available and a fit and appropriate sentence.
 

 The Crown conceded that a CSO was available but disagreed on it being a fit sentence.
 

 Defense argued for a CSO, in part, because Bill C-5 recently received Royal Assent and did not preclude offences of fraud over $5000 from receiving a CSO. Defense referred to excerpts from Hansard House of Commons and House of Senate Debates to support that a CSO should be contemplated. Additionally, Defense counsel pointed to the fact that s 380(1.1) CC which maintained a mandatory minimum punishment of 2 years incarceration for a fraud over one million dollars ($1M) was another indicator that Parliament deemed incarceration to be mandatory only for those fraud cases of significant value. 
 

 I have read the excerpts referred to in the House of Commons and Senate Debates My interpretation is that the Member, Mr. Gary Anandasangaree in the House of Commons, and Senator Marc Gold were simply providing the House and Senate with an overview of the benefits of a CSO. A CSO allows an offender who does not pose a risk to society to serve his/her sentence within the community on strict conditions This would allow an offender and society to benefit by allowing the offender to continue with employment, education, family commitments, addiction treatment, and health related concerns The speaker in the House of Commons stated on December 13, 2021 at page 1035: “Our government is taking steps to ensure that the strong hand of criminal justice is used where it is needed to keep people safe, but not where it would be discriminatory or counter-productive.” As stated in the House of Senate Debates on June 20, 2022: “Bill C-5 reserves harsh penalties for serious criminal behaviour while recognizing that in some cases, the interests of justice and public safety are better served by flexible and creative approaches to sentencing or even by the absence of sentencing…” However, as stated in the June 14, 2022 debate at page 6646: “…it is not about giving every offender a conditional sentence.” 
 

 An offence contrary to s 380(1)(a) CC is an offence of fraud over $5000. As with many offences, the severity of the offence can be influenced by several factors. There is a significant monetary difference between $5000 and $1M, as are there significantly different circumstances in how a fraud can be committed. Certainly, the value of the fraud will be a factor to consider. As will such factors as: was there a breach of trust, was the fraud a single event or did it involve multiple transactions over an extended period of time, how many victims were involved, did the offender cease his/her criminal behavior prior to detection, did the accused disclose the frauds prior to detection, did the offender suffer with significant mental health concerns that contributed to his/her offending behavior, was full restitution made, and was there an early guilty plea. Once it has been determined that the offender is not a risk to the public, it is not simply a determination of the value of the fraud committed that will determine if a CSO is appropriate, but instead it requires an assessment of the seriousness of the offending behavior and the moral culpability of the offender. 
 

 Counsel provided me with the following cases – all of which I have thoroughly read: Bissonnette; R v Bunn, 2000 SCC 9 (Bunn); R v Evanson, 2019 ABCA 122 (Evanson); R v Tran, 2021 ONSC 1888 (Tran); R v Sampson, 2016 ONCJ 128 (Sampson); R v Callender, 2009 CanlII 72039 (ON SC) (Callender); R v Fehr, 2001 SKCA 37 (Fehr); R v Kratky, 1997 CanLii 936 (BC SC) (Kratky); Bracegirdle; R v Fraser, 2007 ABCA 386 (Fraser); Fulcher; McKinnon; McTigue; R v Miles, 2011 ABCA 133 (Miles); R v Nguyen, 2011 ABCA 300 (Nguyen); Oliphant; R v Watkinson, 2001 ABCA 83 (Watkinson); R v Zenari, 2012 ABCA 279 (Zenari).
 

 Several of these cases were provided for sentencing principles, while others were referred to for the purposes of parity. 
 

 Parity requires that a similar sentence be imposed for a similar offender who commits a similar offence. Thus, the facts relied on are an important part of parity, and binding cases within our jurisdiction have greater precedential value. 
 

 Defense supplied seven fraud cases. Of the seven cases, Evanson was the only one from Alberta, Bunn was a decision from the SCC, and the remaining five were from out of jurisdiction. 
 

 Evanson involved a fraud of $545,773. The accused was an insurance broker who created fake client accounts and increased commission reports fraudulently. The offences occurred over a ten-year period, and the monies were used to cover day-to-day expenses. Only $25,000 had been paid back at the time of sentencing. The accused pled guilty. The Court of Appeal overturned the 14-month jail sentence and imposed a period of incarceration of two years less a day. 
 

 Bunn, which was the most persuasive case provided, involved a lawyer who had misappropriated trust monies. The total amount converted was approximately $86,000. Once discovered by the Law Society, the accused was suspended from practicing law and later disbarred. The accused had one daughter and was the sole provider for his family. His wife was disabled and confined to a wheelchair. The Pre-Sentence Report disclosed that the accused was acutely aware of what he had lost, including a 20-year career as a lawyer, and the respect of the public and his peers. As referred to in the decision at para 4, “[h]e suffered ‘humiliation and torment … amplified with the realization that his invalid wife and teenage daughter must share in the embarrassment and debasement of his personal debacle’.” In upholding the CSO, the SCC commented that “…the ruin and humiliation that Mr. Bunn had brought down upon himself and his family, together with the loss of his professional status, could provide sufficient denunciation and deterrence when coupled with a conditional sentence of two years less a day with house arrest.” Also taken into consideration as mitigating by the court in upholding the CSO was the fact that the accused was “the sole provider and caregiver for both his wife, who suffered from multiple sclerosis and had been confined to a wheelchair for years, and their teenage daughter.” (Bunn at para 23)
 

 The facts in Bunn are strikingly different from the case before this Court. First, the value of the fraud was $86,000 versus $443,206. Bunn had been suffering financial woes for many years. As previously mentioned, there was no evidence that Pandit was experiencing any financial woe. Rather, I find Pandit’s offending behaviour was motivated by greed. Unlike Bunn, Pandit has been able to maintain employment in the area of accounting/payroll. From the letters of support provided it does not appear that Pandit’s reputation has suffered, or if so, not to the extent that Bunn’s legal career was ruined. Further, Pandit’s wife is employed as disclosed in Exhibit #2, Tab 6, page 4 under the title “Finance”, unlike Bunn who was the sole provider of his family and was the caregiver of his daughter and wife who was disabled and confined to a wheelchair. 
 

 As for the other cases provided by Defense that supported the imposition of a CSO, all those cases were from out of our jurisdiction and as such were of less precedential value.
 

 The Crown supplied ten Alberta Court of Appeal (ABCA) decisions. Seven of the ten cases imposed a jail sentence.
 

 Fraser involved a bookkeeper who breached a position of trust to misappropriate $132,160.96. The Court replaced a 12-month jail sentence with a 12-month CSO. The Court decided that:
…[T]he crucial question on sentencing was whether the unfortunate circumstances in her life, plus her complete co-operation with the authorities by restitution and guilty plea, plus the inordinate delay in prosecution [4 years after the crime was detected and the accused made more than full restitution] with its consequent seriously prejudicial effects upon the appellant, justified the application to her case of s 742.1 of the Criminal Code,…” (Fraser at para 6). 
 

 The Court found that it was not merely the accused’s cooperation or restitution, nor the accused’s personal difficulties which actuated the crime, that were the decisive factors on their own. Nor was the inordinate delay itself decisive, which often can result from the complexity of these types of cases, or as a product of the offender’s conduct. Rather, it was the combination of all these factors, “coupled with the demonstrably prejudicial and even destructive effect upon the life of the [accused] over a period of five years from the process of the law itself.” (Fraser at para 18).
 

 Nguyen involved a pharmacy tech who stole $8,900 over eight months. The offender kept a journal for the purposes of repayment. Once caught, he immediately confessed and turned over the journal. The original sentence imposed was a conditional discharge. The Court of Appeal reiterated that only in truly exceptional circumstances would a CSO be warranted. Given the Crown’s position in support of a CSO, the Court was satisfied that the circumstances justified such a sentence (at para 8). 
 

 Watkinson involved an insurance adjuster who made $120,000 in payments to a third party and profited $16,000 through secret commissions. The scheme involved 44 transactions. She cooperated once caught, but no restitution was made. She was granted an 18-month CSO, which was upheld by the Court of Appeal. Watkinson appears to be one of the first cases decided post-Proulx (R v Proulx, 2000 SCC 5). The Court placed significant weight on the preconditions that must be met before a CSO could be contemplated and decided that, despite the importance of denunciation and deterrence in fraud cases that involved a breach of trust, the Court was satisfied that in this case a CSO was consistent with the fundamental purposes and principles of sentencing. 
 

 As stated by the Court in McKinnon at para 76:
One can find an occasional appellate decision which approves a conditional sentence for embezzlement, but the great majority do not. Those which do invariably involve special circumstances and a first offender. The great majority of appellate decisions send embezzlers to jail. 
 

 These cases highlight, that despite the seriousness of a breach of trust fraud, in exceptional circumstances, a CSO may nonetheless be warranted. But as has been reiterated in several decisions, “absent truly exceptional circumstances, the sentencing goals of deterrence and denunciation demand a sentence of imprisonment…” (Fulcher at para 30; McKinnon at paras 13-15; Bracegirdle at para 42; McTighe at paras 23 and 28).
 

 In Miles, at para 32, counsel for the offender suggested that the accused’s guilty plea, the fact that she appeared before the court with no prior criminal record, and that she had made partial restitution were exceptional circumstances that supported the imposition of a CSO. The Court disagreed. The Court reminded us that it was not unusual for an offender who commits these types of offences, to come before the court with no prior criminal record. A criminal record would, in most instances, preclude someone from obtaining employment that would put them in a position that these offenders find themselves. Nor was a guilty plea exceptional. A review of these cases indicated that a guilty plea was often entered once the theft was detected. Finally, while restitution was a mitigating factor, it was not unusual. The Court stated that none of these factors, either alone or together, put this case into the realm of “exceptional circumstances”. 
 
V. Conclusion
 

 Defense argued that Pandit’s circumstances would warrant a CSO. The collective circumstances that were argued to be exceptional, were as follows:
a)

Admitted his guilt almost immediately after his offences were discovered and entered guilty pleas on May 4, 2021.
b)

 No prior criminal record.
c)

Has not reoffended since being on bail.
d)

Made full restitution to Jaskaran and Harman Bhatti and entered a settlement agreement with Dr. Singh on November 1, 2020. 
e)

Pandit has a history of mental health issues with one recorded incident of attempted suicide in November 2019.
f)

 He struggles with alcohol consumption.
g)

Has strong family and community support.
h)

Pandit is a husband and father of two children. He is a highly educated and pro-social man with a Masters in Commerce and a Bachelor of Laws 
 

 I disagree that these factors, either individually or collectively, catapult Pandit’s circumstances into the exceptional.
 

 The fact that once detected Pandit pled guilty and that he has no prior criminal record is not exceptional, but the norm in these types of cases. (Miles at para 32; Oliphant at para 5).
 

 While restitution should be considered mitigating and reduce one’s sentence, “it should not be radically different” (McKinnon at para 92. See also: Oliphant at para 8; Zenari at para 16).
 

 Significant mental health issues, coupled with a guilty plea, complete restoration, and an inordinate delay in the prosecution could support the imposition of a CSO (Fraser). However, I find Pandit’s mental health issues arose after his crimes were detected and had no bearing on his offending behavior. 
 

 “Good character is far from a distinguishing factor in cases such as these.” (Fulcher para 35).
 

 Addiction is neither mitigating or an extenuating circumstance. (McTighe at para 18). While addiction issues may provide an explanation for an offender’s conduct, it does not provide an excuse.
 

 The fact that Pandit continues to receive support from his family and community is not an exceptional factor in mitigation. Fortunate, yes, but not exceptional. 
 

 Additionally, s 380.1(2) CC reads: 
When a court imposes a sentence for an offence referred to in section 380, …, it shall not consider as mitigating circumstances the offender’s employment, employment skills or status or reputation in the community if those circumstances were relevant to, contributed to or were used in the commission of the offence.
 

 The reason Pandit was able to secure employment as a bookkeeper was because of his reputation, education, and employment skills 
 

 Based on the above analysis I find that a CSO would not be consistent with the fundamental purpose and principle of sentencing set out in ss 718 to 718.2 CC. 
 

 As stated by the Court in Proulx at para 107:
Incarceration, which is ordinarily a harsher sanction, may provide more deterrence than a conditional sentence… there may be circumstances in which the need for deterrence will warrant incarceration. This will depend in part on whether the offence is one in which the effects of incarceration are likely to have a real deterrent effect, as well as on the circumstances of the community in which the offences were committed.
 

 I find a fit and proportionate sentence to be 18 months incarceration.
 

 As for ancillary orders, pursuant to s 380.2 CC, I further prohibit Pandit from seeking, obtaining, or continuing any employment or becoming or being a volunteer in any capacity, that involves having authority over the real property, money, or valuable security of another person for a period of 5 years. 
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/mb/ca/2023mbca2.html
 






 
The accused appeals his convictions for second degree murder and attempted murder arising from a tragic stabbing incident that occurred outside a Middle Eastern restaurant in Winnipeg (the restaurant) on April 15, 2019. After hearing the appeal, we dismissed it with reasons to follow. These are those reasons. 
Background
 






 
The stabbing victims, M.A. and Y.A., and a group of their friends and family (the birthday group) were at the restaurant celebrating M.A.’s birthday. The accused was a server at the restaurant. The birthday group’s rowdyism resulted in M.A. getting into a brief but heated argument with the accused which culminated in the exchange of “vulgar insults” (at para 2) and pushing each other. The two men were physically separated but each continued to hurl verbal abuse at the other, which included reference to sexual acts involving female family members, language that is highly inflammatory in Arabic culture. At one point, M.A. picked up a knife and waved it until relinquishing it. Although there was no evidence the accused saw M.A. wave the knife, the trial judge accepted he heard M.A.’s threats to kill him. 
 






 
The manager of the restaurant ejected the birthday group and asked the accused to end his shift and go home. Over the next several minutes, the accused and M.A. were out of each other’s sight but still within earshot of each other’s insults. The birthday group exited the restaurant through the front door and congregated outside on the sidewalk although M.A. came back into the restaurant briefly. M.A. was still “visibly agitated” at this time (at para 34). The stabbing incident occurred about two minutes after the birthday group initially left the restaurant in what the trial judge characterized as a “targeted attack” (at para 69). 
 






 
While the birthday group was leaving, the accused went into the restaurant’s kitchen and armed himself with a knife. He was visibly angry but told a co-worker, on two or three occasions, to “[l]eave [him] alone” (at para 33) as he said he was going to leave and go home. The accused walked towards the rear of the restaurant but turned back to get his car keys. He then exited the building via the rear of the restaurant and walked to his vehicle that was parked in the back lane. He opened the door and turned on the vehicle’s lights. He then went around to the front of the restaurant, brandished the knife and proceeded directly to attack M.A. in a crowd of about 10 people. Y.A. interceded and the accused fatally stabbed Y.A. in the chest. He then stabbed M.A. in the chest with the knife going through M.A.’s body and out his back. M.A. fell to the ground. The accused then stabbed M.A. a second time above his hip. Y.A. died soon after being stabbed and M.A. almost perished. The accused testified and said he had no memory of what occurred other than being very angry. 
Discussion
 






 
The first ground of appeal is that the trial judge failed to consider all of the evidence in determining intent for both offences (see R v Walle, 2012 SCC 41 at para 46). The argument is that she focused exclusively on what occurred in the short period after the accused left the restaurant’s kitchen with the knife and ignored the prior heated argument and the fact that the accused was very angry. In our respectful view, this submission fails. 
 






 
The trial judge’s reasons reflect a careful and sensitive approach to the evidence as a whole that responded to the live issues at the trial and the parties’ key arguments. Because she accepted the accused’s evidence that he could not recall what was on his mind at the time of the stabbings, there was no direct evidence of intent. Absent something in her reasons that suggests she “subconsciously subverted what [she] said, [she] is ‘entitled to be taken at [her] word’” (R v McLean, 2022 MBCA 60 at para 48) that her decision on intent was based, as she stated, on “the testimony of the witnesses to the stabbing, the surrounding circumstances of the incident, and the autopsy report” (at para 66) in relation to Y.A. There was no obligation on the trial judge to say to what degree particular pieces of evidence led to her decision given that she provided an intelligible pathway to the result she reached (see R v Ramos, 2020 MBCA 111 at para 47, aff’d 2021 SCC 15).

 






 
The next ground of appeal is that the trial judge erred in rejecting the partial defence of provocation (see section 232 of the Criminal Code (the Code)). She found that the Crown had proven beyond a reasonable doubt that M.A.’s conduct was not sufficient to deprive an ordinary person of self-control, thereby excluding the partial defence of provocation. Absent an extricable legal error, the trial judge’s finding on the ordinary person standard is a question of fact, reviewable on a standard of palpable and overriding error (see section 232(3)(b) of the Code; and R v Cassan (ER), 2012 MBCA 46 at para 37). 
 






 
The principal submission is that the trial judge misapplied the objective element of provocation—that is, the ordinary person standard—by relying on the perceptions of witnesses from the birthday group and restaurant employees as to the nature of the argument between M.A. and the accused and the cultural overtones of the insults exchanged (the witnesses’ evidence) (see R v Tran, 2010 SCC 58 at paras 30-35) rather than making her own assessment. The accused also says that the trial judge failed to undertake a detailed assessment of the reliability and credibility of the various witnesses in the restaurant before relying on their evidence.
 






 
We do not agree that the trial judge abdicated her role as argued by the accused. She stated that, in her analysis of provocation, she “[could] and should consider the entire context of the interaction” between M.A. and the accused (at para 79). After considering the witnesses’ evidence, she reviewed other evidence and then stated that she had considered all of the evidence in making her determination (see paras 91-92). Thus, while she took account of the witnesses’ evidence, she did her own assessment of all of the evidence and came to her own conclusion on this element.
 






The trial judge was clearly entitled to take this eyewitness evidence into account in her analysis. Many of the witnesses to the heated argument were of the same gender, approximate age and ethnicity as that of the accused. We are satisfied that the trial judge did not rely on this evidence in any way that is contrary to “contemporary social norms” (Tran at para 19). The witnesses’ evidence as to the heated argument was clearly relevant to applying the ordinary person standard as that evidence, to the benefit of the accused, established that the insults exchanged were far beyond what a server would experience from typical “rude, unruly customers” (at para 85) and had a cultural significance (see R v Nahar, 2004 BCCA 77 at paras 34, 37; and Tran at paras 31-35).
 






We also are not convinced that it was an error for the trial judge to rely on the witnesses’ evidence despite the frailties with it alleged by the accused. The fact that there were minor inconsistencies from different eyewitnesses as to the sequence of events is not surprising and, ultimately, is unremarkable. All of the witnesses were examined at length at trial and surveillance video inside the restaurant allowed the trial judge to see for herself the movements and bodily language as the argument began and evolved. Also, several of the witnesses were fellow employees of the restaurant and, thus, independent of the stabbing victims. Given the deferential standard of review as to the evaluation of witness testimony, we see no basis for this Court to interfere with the trial judge’s fact finding (see R v Jovel, 2019 MBCA 116 at paras 26-30). 
 






The law is premised on fostering self-control and non-violent behaviour. Accordingly, provocation is a narrow and restrictive partial defence that is limited to situations where an ordinary person would, rather than could, have lost self-control (see Kent Roach, Criminal Law, 7th ed (Toronto: Irwin Law, 2018) at 445). 
 






Ultimately, we are not persuaded that the trial judge made a palpable and overriding error in concluding that the accused’s targeted attack of M.A., after the birthday group had departed, was an unexpected surprise escalation. The fact that the accused, although still angry, told a co-worker, in essence, that everything was okay and that he was going to leave and go home, provides ample basis to support the trial judge’s conclusion. We are satisfied that it was reasonably open to her to conclude that the accused’s conduct was outside societal standards of reasonableness and responsibility notwithstanding the heated argument inside the restaurant. 
 






In light of our decision, it is unnecessary to address the trial judge’s alternative finding that, if she was incorrect on the objective element of provocation, the partial defence would otherwise fail for aspects of the subjective requirements of provocation, other than to say we see no reversible error in her alternative finding.
 






The last ground of appeal is that, contrary to R v Villaroman, 2016 SCC 33 at paras 37-38, the trial judge failed to consider alternative inferences on the circumstantial evidence relating to the mens rea for the offence of attempted murder. The accused says that an alternative inference—that he armed himself with a knife with the intention to cause bodily harm only—could not be ruled out despite the fact that he had no recollection of what his intent was when he testified. 
 






Appellate deference plays an important role in reviewing a trier of fact’s assessment of circumstantial evidence (see R v Hall, 2018 MBCA 122 at paras 164-66). The appellate court must not retry the case by looking at the evidence in an “alternative way” as it is for the trier of fact to decide whether, and to what degree, a given inference is plausible or speculative (at para 200; and R v Fedyck, 2018 MBCA 74 at para 25 (see also paras 31-32), aff’d 2019 SCC 3). The limited focus of the appellate court in assessing inferential reasoning is considering whether the trier of fact, acting judicially, could reasonably be satisfied that the accused’s guilt was the only reasonable inference available on the totality of the evidence (see Villaroman at para 55; R v Robinson, 2017 BCCA 6 at para 38, aff’d 2017 SCC 52; and R v Youssef, 2018 ONCA 16 at para 4, aff’d 2018 SCC 49). 
 






The conviction for the attempted murder of M.A. was well-founded on the totality of the evidence given that the accused pursued and targeted M.A., he fatally stabbed Y.A. and he then committed the actus reus of the attempted murder (i.e., some step towards the commission of the murder of M.A. beyond mere acts of preparation), namely, stabbing M.A. twice with great violence in vulnerable parts of his body (see The Queen v Ancio, 1984 CanLII 69 (SCC), 1 SCR 225 at 247). The alternative inference proposed by the accused as to his intent that the savage nature of the stabbing of M.A. may have been only to injure him, as opposed to kill him, after the accused had already fatally stabbed Y.A., strikes us as “‘fanciful’ . . . speculation” (Villaroman at para 37). It does not surprise us that the trial judge rejected this submission. 
Disposition
 






In the result, the appeal was dismissed. 
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/mb/ca/2023mbca4.html
 






 
The accused was convicted of possession of a prohibited firearm with ammunition and unauthorized possession of a prohibited firearm. The latter conviction was stayed pursuant to the Kienapple principle (see Kienapple v The Queen, 1974 CanLII 14 (SCC), 1 SCR 729). He was sentenced to 40 months’ imprisonment. 
 






 
The accused appeals his conviction on the ground that the verdict was unreasonable and seeks leave to appeal his sentence and, if granted, appeals his sentence on the basis that it is demonstrably unfit. 
After hearing the appeal, we dismissed the conviction appeal, granted leave to appeal the sentence, but dismissed the sentence appeal with reasons to follow. These are those reasons. 
 






 
The circumstances of the offence are that the accused moved into the home of his former girlfriend (the home), Patricia Friesen (Ms Friesen), in March 2018, and moved out in June 2019, after an incident occurred and their relationship deteriorated. While living in the home, he slept on a couch in the basement, which he separated from the rest of the space with makeshift walls. After the accused ceased residing in the home, Ms Friesen found bullets in a drawer beside the couch in July 2019 and a sawed-off shotgun (the shotgun) on the floor between the wall and the couch in August 2019.
 






 
At trial, the accused did not testify in his own defence, but argued that other people could have placed the shotgun where it was discovered. In convicting the accused, the trial judge noted that there was no evidence that anyone other than Ms Friesen and the accused were in the area occupied by the accused at any time and that this space was for his exclusive use. 
 






 
In sentencing the accused to 40 months, the trial judge stressed the importance of the principles of deterrence and denunciation in firearm offences and considered the nefarious nature of the shotgun, the accused’s related record and the safety risk to the children in the home. 
 






 
On the conviction appeal, the accused argues that the verdict is unreasonable as there was no direct evidence of possession and that the trial judge incorrectly applied the law on drawing of inferences, since a reasonable explanation for the presence of the firearm was that someone else could have placed it there. 
 






 
In our view, there is no basis for appellate intervention.
 






 
Where the verdict depends on circumstantial evidence, the reviewing court does not draw its own inferences, but considers whether the inferences drawn by the trier of fact were reasonably available in light of the standard of proof (see R v Villaroman, 2016 SCC 33 at para 67). In convicting the accused, the trial judge quoted from Villaroman and understood that, where the evidence is based on circumstantial evidence, the court must be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused’s guilt is the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the totality of the evidence (see para 55). His conclusion that this was so was reasonably supported by the evidence. The evidence supported his finding that the shotgun and ammunition were found in an area used exclusively by the accused. As the trial judge highlighted, this was an area of the basement demarked by makeshift walls where he slept and which no one else used. Further, Ms Friesen maintained that since the accused moved the couch, no one else had been in that area of the home even after he had moved out.
 






 
It is fundamental for the trier of fact to draw the line that separates reasonable doubt from speculation where circumstantial evidence is concerned. Such an assessment can only be set aside when it is unreasonable (see Villaroman at para 71). In our view, a properly instructed jury, acting judicially, could reasonably have been satisfied that the accused’s guilt was the only reasonable conclusion available on the totality of the evidence and that the elements of possession were established beyond a reasonable doubt (see Villaroman at para 55; and R v Hall, 2018 MBCA 122 at para 166). 
 






Turning to the sentence appeal, absent an error in principle that had a material impact on the sentence or a sentence that is demonstrably unfit, an appellate court should not intervene (see R v Friesen, 2020 SCC 9 at para 26). A demonstrably unfit sentence is a very high threshold that has been described as unreasonably departing from the principle of proportionality in light of all the relevant circumstances and the applicable range (see R v Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64 at para 53; and R v McLean, 2022 MBCA 60 at para 82). 
 






The accused argues that his conduct is less serious than an outlaw carrying a loaded weapon in public for a criminal purpose, which according to R v Nur, 2015 SCC 15, should attract a sentence at the high end of the range being three years or more. However, Nur also confirmed that “[f]irearm-related offences are serious crimes” (at para 6) and that judges should continue to impose “exemplary sentences that emphasize deterrence and denunciation in appropriate circumstances” (at para 5). 
 






Understandably, in sentencing the accused, the trial judge considered that this was a firearm with an altered serial number that had been sawed off. Given the type of firearm and the absence of any other explanation, he reasonably concluded that its purpose was crime-related and dangerous.
 As well, an aggravating factor for the trial judge was the accused’s criminal record, which included convictions for weapons offences. Additionally, while the accused did not have the shotgun and ammunition in a public setting, the trial judge appropriately noted that this nevertheless posed a significant safety risk to the four young children who lived in the home. 
 






In all of the circumstances and bearing in mind the deferential standard of review, we are not persuaded that the sentence is demonstrably unfit and that appellate intervention is warranted.
 






At the hearing of the appeal, the accused requested that, if this Court upheld the sentence, it should grant a stay of execution of the remaining portion of the custodial sentence to be served. Without deciding the issue of the availability of such a stay on a dismissal of an accused’s sentence appeal, we are not of the view that it is in the interests of justice to grant it on the facts of this case (see R v McMillan (BW), 2016 MBCA 12 at para 36). 
 






For these reasons, we dismissed the conviction appeal, granted leave to appeal sentence, but dismissed the sentence appeal.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/mb/ca/2023mbca6.html
 







This is a motion by the moving party (the CBC) for reconsideration of a publication ban ordered by this Court relating to the death [REDACTED] of a witness (the witness). The witness died [REDACTED] after giving testimony in this Court in the wrongful conviction appeal of the accused. 
 







The details of and the circumstances surrounding the witness’s death are contained in the affidavit of Richard Posner, together with an accompanying book of materials (the Posner affidavit), that was proffered by the accused as fresh evidence on his appeal. 
The events are also described in detail in the briefs filed in connection with the accused’s fresh evidence motion. A publication ban was ordered at the hearing of this fresh evidence motion with the consent of all parties (the publication ban). This Court subsequently dismissed the fresh evidence motion and ordered a continuation of the publication ban.
 







For the reasons that follow, the CBC’s motion for reconsideration of the publication ban is dismissed. First, we deny the CBC standing to bring the motion as it had notice of the publication ban, and we are not persuaded that the CBC proposes to make novel submissions that could have affected the result if those submissions had been made prior to the publication ban being continued (see Canadian Broadcasting Corp v Manitoba, 2021 SCC 33 at para 42 (CBC v Manitoba)). 
Second, we decline to hear the motion as the CBC failed to act with “due dispatch in seeking to set aside” the publication ban (at para 45). Finally, in the event that we are wrong to deny standing to the CBC or to decline to hear the motion due to delay, we decline to reconsider the publication ban as it is necessary to prevent a serious risk to an important public interest, being the dignity of the witness and the witness’s spouse (the spouse). In our view, the benefits of the publication ban outweigh any negative effects on the principle of court openness. 
Background
 







The accused was convicted of first degree murder by a jury in 1987. In 2014, the federal minister of justice referred the conviction to this Court under Part XXI.1 of the Criminal Code as the minister was satisfied that there was a reasonable basis to conclude that there had been a miscarriage of justice.
 







In order to determine the appeal, fresh evidence relating to the trial proceedings was admitted by this Court. The fresh evidence included the evidence of 11 individuals who testified before this Court, one of whom was the witness, [REDACTED]. Some of the fresh evidence was in respect of a deal that prosecutors had made to dismiss drug charges against a key witness in the accused’s murder trial (the Lovelace deal). The rest related to notes and a police report of a telephone call made by the key witness to a police officer (the Jacobson report). 
Neither the Lovelace deal nor the Jacobson report was disclosed to the accused at his trial, hampering his ability to make full answer and defence. On the basis of the fresh evidence, the Crown conceded and this Court found that there had been a miscarriage of justice. 
 







As previously mentioned, the accused brought a second motion to introduce as fresh evidence the material contained in the Posner affidavit. At the beginning of the hearing of the fresh evidence motions on May 28, 2018, a publication ban on the Posner affidavit was imposed. [REDACTED]. The details regarding the witness’s death and the inferences attributed to the content of the Posner affidavit by the accused’s counsel were disclosed during oral submissions. A representative of the CBC was present in court when the publication ban was ordered.
 







As a result of finding that a miscarriage of justice had occurred, we set aside the accused’s conviction, ordered a new trial and entered a judicial stay of proceedings (see 2018 MBCA 125 (Ostrowski 2018)). We dismissed the motion to admit the Posner affidavit as fresh evidence as it had no relevance to the only remaining issue before this Court, being the remedy for the accused’s wrongful conviction (see para 82). This Court also ordered that the publication ban on the Posner affidavit should remain in effect (ibid). 
 







Significantly, the accused did not appeal the dismissal of the fresh evidence motion relating to the Posner affidavit or the publication ban.
 







Ostrowski 2018 was released on November 27, 2018. On or before November 29, 2018, the CBC contacted the media relations officer for the Courts and judiciary of Manitoba (the media relations officer) regarding the publication ban and advised that it was considering an application to challenge the ban. Arrangements were made for a senior CBC representative to attend the Court office on December 3, 2018 to review the notice of motion to introduce the Posner affidavit as fresh evidence and the written briefs filed on the motion. After reviewing the motion and briefs, copies were requested by and made available to the CBC. On or before December 6, 2018, the CBC retained counsel to challenge the publication ban. 
 




 
For reasons that remain unclear, the CBC did not file a motion to set aside the publication ban until May 10, 2019.
 




 
At the initial hearing of the CBC’s motion to set aside the publication ban on October 28, 2019, the Crown raised a threshold issue of whether this Court had jurisdiction to hear the motion. After hearing argument on that point, we concluded that we did not have jurisdiction as we were effectively functus officio (see 2019 MBCA 122 (Ostrowski 2019)).
 




 
The CBC sought and was granted leave to appeal Ostrowski 2019 to the Supreme Court of Canada. The Supreme Court allowed the appeal, set aside Ostrowski 2019 and remanded the CBC’s motion to this Court for us to decide in accordance with its reasons (see CBC v Manitoba at paras 96, 105).
 




 
Prior to the hearing of the motion, the CBC filed written representations suggesting that it was misled by Registry staff and that this was the explanation for or a contributing factor to the delay in filing its notice of motion. The CBC advised that it would “argue that it received incomplete and in some cases incorrect information about the restrictions in place from the Court office” and that this “ultimately led to CBC having to reach out to [Crown counsel] and others for information as to what orders were made and on what basis they were made.”
 




 
A motion was brought on behalf of the employees of the Registry office and other support staff of the Court of Appeal (the Registry staff) for an order permitting them to intervene on the CBC’s motion. The purpose of the motion was to allow the Registrar to address the issues raised relating to communications between representatives of the CBC and the Registry staff and to file an affidavit to ensure that the evidence before this Court was complete. 
 




 
The motion to intervene was granted with the consent of all parties. The Registrar subsequently filed an affidavit providing a more complete record of the interactions between the representatives of the CBC and the Registry staff. Issues
 




 
The “discretionary and fact-specific” decisions (CBC v Manitoba at para 8) remanded to this Court are as follows: 1. Should the CBC be granted standing to challenge the publication ban? 2. Was the motion unreasonably delayed such that it is not in the interests of justice to hear it? 3. Is lifting the publication ban justified taking into account Sherman Estate v Donovan, 2021 SCC 25? (See also para 87.)
 




 
The CBC also seeks access to the Posner affidavit, asserting that the sealing order, which was automatically imposed on the affidavit when it was filed in support of the fresh evidence motion pursuant to r 21(4) of the MB, Court of Appeal Rules, MR 555/88R (the CA Rules), is spent as it only operated until the motion for fresh evidence was decided. This was confirmed by the Supreme Court in CBC v Manitoba (see para 81). As a result, in the event that the CBC has not yet accessed the Posner affidavit, it is free to do so. 
 
Standard of Review
 




 
This is not an appeal but, rather, a motion to reconsider an order previously made by this Court. As a result, there is no applicable standard of review. At the same time, this is not a hearing de novo on the publication ban as the correctness of the initial order is presumed (ibid at para 55). 
 




 
Publication bans are susceptible to reconsideration but on narrow grounds, including that an affected party who was not given notice proposes to make novel submissions that could affect the result or that there was a material change in circumstances (ibid at para 42). The Supreme Court found that there has been no material change in circumstances. Accordingly, this Court is being asked to reconsider the publication ban, not because it was wrongly made but, rather, because it may have been made without consideration of novel submissions by a media representative, specifically the CBC, that could have affected the result (see para 56). Analysis Standing
 




 
In CBC v Manitoba, Kasirer J, writing for the majority, clearly delineated what is required to determine this motion (see paras 75, 87). As a preliminary matter, we must decide if the CBC should be granted standing.
 




 
When an order affecting court openness has been made without notice to the media, a representative of the media generally should have standing to challenge the order if they are able to show that they will make submissions that were not considered and that could have affected the result. Ultimately, the decision to grant standing to a member of the media is discretionary (ibid at para 47).
 




 
In oral argument, the CBC contended that it should not be deemed to have notice of the publication ban as no one in the organization, other than one reporter, knew about the imposition of the publication ban until the CBC’s counsel obtained a transcript of the hearing after having filed its notice of motion on May 10, 2019. That contention is patently wrong as Ostrowski 2018 (issued November 27, 2018) specifically notes that “there was also a publication ban in place at the beginning of the hearing to prevent the publication of any of the details of [the Posner affidavit]” (at para 81).
 




 
We agree with the submission of the spouse and estate of the witness (the family respondents) that there is no question that the CBC was aware of the publication ban at all times. The CBC had been reporting on every aspect of the proceedings and admitted that it had a reporter in the courtroom when the publication ban was originally ordered on May 28, 2018 (see CBC v Manitoba at para 119). 
There is no affidavit or other evidence from that individual. On May 28, 2018, this Court made it clear to all present that, if the Posner affidavit was not admitted as fresh evidence, the publication ban would remain in place. Although the CBC knew the essential facts in the Posner affidavit and the submissions made at the oral hearing, it abided by the publication ban and made no effort to set it aside.
 




 
In our view, the CBC had notice of the publication ban on May 28, 2018, a full six months before the publication ban was continued on November 27, 2018, and nearly one year before it filed its motion.
 




 
Notwithstanding the fact that the CBC had notice of the publication ban on May 28, 2018, we will consider the other aspects of the test for standing.
 




 
The CBC also asserts that it will make new submissions that could have affected this Court’s decision to order the publication ban as it will make arguments regarding the application of the principles in Sherman—principles that we could not have considered at the time the publication ban was ordered as the decision in Sherman had not been rendered.
 




 
The Crown argues that this Court should deny standing to the CBC, noting that we are presumed to have already “balanced the interest of the media in open court proceedings with competing public interests” and that the CBC’s submissions merely re-address this balancing. The family respondents emphasize that there is nothing new in the CBC’s submissions that could affect the result and that standing should be denied.
 




 
In our view, while Sherman has recast and explained the test (see para 38), it did not fundamentally change the law and the CBC’s arguments on the reconsideration motion, while thorough, are not novel. The CBC relies on the established law set out in Dagenais v Canadian Broadcasting Corp, 1994 CanLII 39 (SCC), 3 SCR 835; and R v Mentuck, 2001 SCC 76, and further refined in Sierra Club of Canada v Canada (Minister of Finance), 2002 SCC 41; and Sherman. Ultimately, the CBC argues that the privacy interests of the witness and the spouse do not rise to the level of an important public interest requiring protection and that, in any event, the benefits of the publication ban are outweighed by its negative effects on the constitutionally protected public right to court openness. However, these are the precise issues that this Court is presumed to have considered, and indeed did consider, when the publication ban was ordered.
 




 
In conclusion, having applied the narrow test prescribed in CBC v Manitoba for the granting of standing to the circumstances of this case, we would not exercise our discretion to grant standing to the CBC.
 




 
However, even if we granted standing to the CBC, the conclusion that this Court should decline to hear this motion becomes inescapable upon consideration of the CBC’s delay in bringing this motion. 
Did the CBC Act With Due Dispatch?
 




 
As noted by Kasirer J in CBC v Manitoba, courts may decline to hear a motion to set aside an order “if the moving party was unreasonably slow in bringing that motion after becoming aware of the order, such that it is no longer in the interests of justice to hear it” (at para 48). In the present case, the CBC must show that the delay from the time it became aware of the order to the time it filed its motion in May 2019 was not unreasonable. Kasirer J found that the delay in the CBC bringing its motion was “in the order of six months” (at para 76) as he found that the CBC became aware of the publication ban shortly after November 27, 2018. 
 




 
Kasirer J also noted that the issue of delay was not fully argued in the Supreme Court (see para 89) and that the Supreme Court had previously remanded matters to a court of appeal where the record and arguments were too sparse to resolve the matter confidently. In reconsidering the question of delay, we have had the benefit of a much more complete record and full argument.
 




 
Matters in this Court are expected to proceed with reasonable promptness. Typical timelines under the CA Rules call for filings to be made within 30 days—this includes filing a notice of appeal from a judgment of a lower court (see r 11(1)); perfecting an appeal after receiving notice of deemed abandonment from the Registrar (see r 33(4)); and filing a motion for a rehearing of an appeal (see r 46.2(4)).
 




 
Failure to meet those timelines is often an absolute bar to further proceedings. At a minimum, it necessitates a motion for an extension of time.
 




 
The jurisprudence of this Court setting out the test for granting an extension of time is not applicable in the present case. Nonetheless, in our view, those principles are helpful in assessing the CBC’s argument that its delay was reasonable. The relevant test provides that three criteria must be satisfied by the party seeking an extension of time:

(i) a continuous intention to appeal from a time before the expiration of the filing period,
(ii) a reasonable explanation for the delay, and
(iii) arguable grounds of appeal (see Bohemier v Bohemier, 2001 MBCA 161 at para 2; and Campbell v Campbell, 2011 MBCA 23 at para 6). In addition, this Court has an overriding discretion to grant or refuse an extension of time if it is right and just in the circumstances.
 




 
The CBC submits that it was not unreasonably slow to challenge the ban, asserting that it moved with reasonable dispatch in the circumstances. It also alleges that “the Court office was unable to provide accurate and timely information as to the restrictions notwithstanding multiple communications over a two month period.” The CBC maintains that its efforts to “focus and refine issues in dispute” before challenging the publication ban served the “interests of efficient justice”. The CBC relies on the affidavit of its managing editor, Melanie Verhaeghe, to set out the circumstances that it says show that its delay was reasonable (the Verhaeghe affidavit).
 




 
The Crown’s position is that the CBC’s unreasonable and unexplained delay began on May 28, 2018 when the publication ban was first ordered. The Crown maintains that the Verhaeghe affidavit demonstrates that the CBC failed to act “promptly and with due dispatch” after the release of Ostrowski 2018, and it asserts that “important evidence [was] left out”. The Crown submits that the information contained in the Posner affidavit is irrelevant to the accused’s wrongful conviction and that this is a contextual factor that this Court should take into account in considering whether to hear the motion on its merits. Finally, the Crown argues that, “[i]n a court where timelines typically involve deadlines of 30 days,” this delay goes well beyond what is reasonable.
 




 
The family respondents assert that the CBC was neglectful in pursuing its motion and used a “less-than-robust effort” to move things ahead. They note, in contrast, “the promptness demonstrated by the Court of Appeal staff in its dealings with Mr. Kroft,” asserting that “[t]he delay here [was] not attributable to them.” 
Ultimately, the family respondents submit that the CBC should be taken to have acquiesced to the existence of the publication ban.
 




 
In terms of assessing the CBC’s assertion that it acted with reasonable promptness and was hampered by receiving inaccurate and incomplete information from the Registry staff, the affidavit of the Registrar is illuminating. Exhibit B to that affidavit includes relevant email correspondence not included in the Verhaeghe affidavit.
 




 
After being advised by the media relations officer on November 30, 2018 that “[t]here [was] nothing preventing [the] media from reviewing the material that [was] protected by the [publication] ban” and that the “[m]edia [could] look at the notice of motion and the briefs filed in relation to the fresh evidence,” Cecil Rosner, the CBC’s Director, Investigative Journalism (Rosner), wrote to the media relations officer “to make an arrangement to come down Monday to have a look.” 
 




 
On December 3, 2018, Rosner sent the following email to the media relations officer: . . . Thanks for providing access to the Ostrowski materials.
 
I would appreciate copies of:
 
1.
March 23/18 [The accused]’s . . . application for admission of further evidence.
 
2.
May 22, 2018 [The accused]’s brief pertaining to [the fresh] evidence, along with the [Crown]’s response. . . .
 




 
By December 6, 2018, Jonathan Kroft (Kroft) had been retained by the CBC to challenge the publication ban and, in an email to the media relations officer on that date, indicated he “gather[ed] [she had] or [was] also copying documents that [Rosner] [had] requested.” 
 




 
On December 19, 2018, the media relations officer wrote to Rosner by email (with a copy to Kroft) to advise him as follows: “The pages are copied . . .. I’ll put them downstairs before I leave today.” Clearly this was a reference to copies of the notice of motion to admit the Posner affidavit and the related briefs.
 




 
Curiously, despite the fact that the CBC had reviewed the briefs relating to the Posner affidavit and that copies were made available to it, the Verhaeghe affidavit contains the following statement: “I am further advised by Mr. Kroft and believe that he was advised by the [Registry staff] that the [accused’s] Brief filed in respect of the Fresh Evidence Motion was not available to the public.” In his affidavit, the Registrar attests that he “did not advise Mr. Kroft that the [accused’s] Brief, filed in support of the Fresh Evidence Motion, was not available to the public” and that he does “not believe that any other member of the Court of Appeal Registry staff, or [the media relations officer] so advised Mr. Kroft.”
 




 
The CBC argues that there was initially confusion as to the nature and terms of the publication ban. Even accepting this argument in the face of the fact that the CBC had a representative in the courtroom on May 28, 2018—when the publication ban was initially imposed and the details of the Posner affidavit were discussed at length—the terms of both the publication ban and the sealing order were set out in paragraphs 81 and 82 of Ostrowski 2018 and had been explained to Rosner as early as November 30, 2018. 
 




 
If this were not enough, the situation was again made crystal clear in correspondence from the Registrar to the CBC’s counsel on January 21, 2019. The Registrar explained that: 
. . . a)
. . . just the affidavit containing the fresh evidence is sealed pursuant to rule 21(4) of the Court of Appeal Rules.
 
b) . . . at the outset of the proceedings on May 28, 2018, the Court imposed a publication ban preventing the publication of any of the details of the proposed fresh evidence. In paragraph 82 of [Ostrowski 2018], the Court ordered that the publication ban would remain in effect. . . .
 




 
Despite the clarity and completeness of the information provided to the CBC’s counsel by January 21, 2019, the Verhaeghe affidavit continues as follows: “[O]n or about January 31, 2019, Mr. Kroft called [the media relations officer] with further questions and concerns about the information provided by the Court.” 
 




 
A conference call between Kroft, the media relations officer and the Registrar was arranged for February 8, 2019. The Verhaeghe affidavit states: “During the conference call it appeared that [the media relations officer] and [the Registrar] were not in a position to answer CBC’s questions . . .”.
 




 
The Crown correctly observes that, while the CBC tendered evidence attempting to justify its delay after November 27, 2018, it has not tendered any evidence to explain why it did not challenge the initial publication ban immediately after May 28, 2018. This is an unexplained delay of six months. As we have already indicated, there is no affidavit from the CBC representative, who was present in the courtroom on May 28, 2018, and no evidence of the steps taken, if any, by that representative. This is particularly surprising given that, at the commencement of the hearing on May 28, 2018, this Court stated that there was a publication ban in relation to the Posner affidavit and wanted that fact “to be clear for any member of the media who may be present in the courtroom.”
 




 
While the evidence shows that the CBC formed an intention to challenge the publication ban after November 27, 2018, the explanation for its delay is not reasonable. In our view, even taking the charitable perspective that the CBC became aware of the publication ban shortly after that date, its delay is unjustified and the explanation offered is entirely unsatisfactory. 
 




 
There was, in our view, nothing inaccurate or incomplete about the information provided by the Registry staff. The CBC had all of the information that it needed to file a motion to set aside the publication ban prior to January 21, 2019. Certainly, by that date, there is no reasonable basis to suggest that the CBC or its counsel needed further information.
 




 
The situation was aptly described by Abella J in CBC v Manitoba (at para 126): An unexplained six month delay for filing a motion to have a publication ban reconsidered — even a four month delay, on a charitable interpretation of when the CBC had full and complete notice of the nature of the publication ban — is inordinate. Under no definition of “due dispatch” or “prompt action” can this delay be justified, particularly since the CBC was fully aware — and present — from the outset of the proceedings, the ban, and the ban’s continuation. . . .
 




 
While we agree that the fact that the Posner affidavit was not admitted as new evidence should not shield the publication ban from review (ibid at para 82), the significance of the information is still a consideration when deciding whether to hear the motion given the delay. Here, the Posner affidavit played no part in this Court’s decision, its relevance was dubious at best and it was open to various interpretations. 
 




 
Having conducted “a contextual balancing of finality and timely justice against the importance of the matter being heard on its merits” (ibid at para 49), and having considered the magnitude of the delay, the attempt to deflect responsibility for the delay onto Registry staff and the need for an assurance of finality for the family respondents, we are satisfied that it is not in the interests of justice to hear the motion. 
 




 
However, in the event that we are wrong in that conclusion, we will now consider whether, if standing had been granted and we had found the CBC’s delay to be reasonable, the publication ban should be reconsidered. Reconsideration of the Publication Ban




 Introduction and Law
 




 
As to the substance of the CBC’s motion, the Supreme Court directed this Court to apply the test in Sierra Club as recast in Sherman (see CBC v Manitoba at para 77). Under that test, a court can order discretionary limits on court openness only where (1) openness poses a serious risk to an important public interest, (2) the order sought is necessary to prevent that risk, and (3) the benefits of the order outweigh its negative effects (see Sherman at para 38).
 




 
When deciding whether an important public interest is at stake, Kasirer J noted that, in Sherman, the Court held that “there is an important public interest in a narrower dimension of privacy concerning the protection of individual dignity” (CBC v Manitoba at para 79). Individual dignity is engaged when the information at issue “is sufficiently sensitive such that it strikes at their biographical core, revealing something ‘intimate and personal about the individual, their lifestyle or their experiences’” (ibid).
 




 
In Sherman, the Court provided examples of the types of “sensitive personal information that, if exposed, could give rise to a serious risk” to individual dignity, including stigmatized medical conditions, stigmatized work, sexual orientation and subjection to sexual assault or harassment (at para 77). While acknowledging that publication of this type of private information is a concern felt “first and foremost” by the individual involved, there is nonetheless a public interest in its protection (at para 48). Personal privacy is considered in our society to be a valuable commodity worthy of safeguarding. As stated by Kasirer J, “The question is not whether the information is ‘personal’ to the individual concerned, but whether, because of its highly sensitive character, its dissemination would occasion an affront to their dignity that society as a whole has a stake in protecting” (at para 33).
 




 
The traditional common law principle, reflected in the Latin maxim actio personalis moritur cum persona, was that privacy rights terminated with the death of an individual. However, this position has been rejected in Canadian law. 
 




 
In Grant v Winnipeg Regional Health Authority et al, 2015 MBCA 44, Mainella JA, commenting on this principle in the context of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms (the Charter), stated: “I see no imaginable reason to borrow such a discredited and outdated principle of the common law to the modern age where key values underlying the Charter include the affirmation of individual human dignity and respect for the value of human life” (at para 84).
 




 
There is also statutory recognition in Canada that deceased persons have privacy rights. For example, in Manitoba, The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act, CCSM c F175 (FIPPA), provides that “disclosure of personal information is not an unreasonable invasion of a third party’s privacy if . . . the information is about an individual who has been dead for 25 years or more” (at section 17(4)(h)), the implication being that disclosure of such information would be an unreasonable invasion of privacy if the individual has been dead for less than 25 years.
 




 
Under equivalent legislation in British Columbia, an adjudicator at the Office of the Information & Privacy Commissioner upheld the decision of the Office of the Chief Coroner to deny a father access to his adult son’s suicide note that shed “light on the deceased’s state of mind before he died” (British Columbia (Chief Coroner), Re, 2007 CarswellBC 4338 at para 16). 
The adjudicator concluded that disclosure of the note would be an unreasonable invasion of the son’s privacy as it contained personal information relating to “a medical, psychiatric or psychological . . . condition” (ibid).
 




 
Similar to FIPPA, The Personal Health Information Act, SM 1997, c 51, allows for disclosure of personal health information to a relative of a deceased individual, but only if that disclosure “is not an unreasonable invasion of the deceased’s privacy” (at section 22(2)(d)).
 




 
Perhaps most importantly, the Supreme Court has recently recognized that deceased persons have continuing dignity and privacy interests when they are complainants in a criminal case. In R v Barton, 2019 SCC 33, the majority commented that “Ms. Gladue’s dignity and privacy . . . continued despite her death” (at para 83).
 




 
One way that American courts have protected individuals’ privacy after death is by recognizing familial or relational privacy interests. In the early case of Schuyler v Curtis et al, 147 NY 434 (Ct App 1895), the Court commented (at p 447): 
. . . . . . [I]t is the right of the living, and not that of the dead, which is recognized. A privilege may be given the surviving relatives of a deceased person to protect his memory, but the privilege exists for the benefit of the living, to protect their feelings, and to prevent a violation of their own rights in the character and memory of the deceased. . . . . . .
 




 
One author has observed that the principle behind these cases is “the theory that a decedent’s survivors have a right to privacy separate from the right of a decedent” (Natalie M Banta, “Death and Privacy in the Digital Age” (2016) 94:3 NCL Rev 927 at 972). Similarly, Clay Calvert explains that the law attempts to strike a balance between the public’s “right to newsworthy information about the dead, and concerns for the family’s privacy rights, emotional tranquility, solemn respect, and dignity” (Clay Calvert, “The Privacy of Death: An Emergent Jurisprudence and Legal Rebuke to Media Exploitation and a Voyeuristic Culture” (2006) 26:2 Loy LA Ent LR 133 at 134-35 [footnotes omitted]). This Court’s decision in Grant left the door open to such claims. 
 




 
Having mentioned American law on this topic, we will briefly refer to the civilian position. As explained by Lilian Edwards & Edina Harbinja, “Protecting Post-Mortem Privacy: Reconsidering the Privacy Interests of the Deceased in a Digital World” (2013) 32:1 Cardozo Arts & Ent LJ 83 (at pp 103‑4, 109): . . . By contrast, many states whose legal system derives partly or wholly from civilian tradition have historically been more inclined to recognise both the principled existence of personality rights, and their persistence after death, for reasons related to the historical respect for notions of liberty, dignity and reputation, especially of creators. In such a tradition, the main driver of respect for personality rights is arguably non-economic (though the two are of course inextricably intermixed) so the likelihood of transmission of the right on death is much greater than in common law. . . . . . .
 
In civilian systems, as might be expected following their more dignitary tradition, the law provides for actions to protect the memory of the deceased, and the honour of his heirs, spouse or legatees. . . . . . .
 




 
In our view, if a privacy interest meets the Sherman threshold and there is a public interest in protecting it, that public interest should survive the person’s death. In essence, if the privacy interest transcends the individual and is recognized as a social good, the biological status of the deceased person is far less relevant.




 The Parties’ Positions
 




 
Both the CBC and the accused say that the publication ban should be set aside.
 




 
The CBC argues that there is no serious risk to an important public interest that is protected by the publication ban. It submits that the witness does not have a dignity interest that continued after death. As for the spouse, the CBC asserts that there is no evidence before this Court regarding [REDACTED] circumstances and how publication of the Posner affidavit would pose a serious risk to [REDACTED] dignity. Alternatively, the CBC suggests that the publication ban is too broad and could be limited to banning publication of the name of the witness or be limited in duration. Finally, the CBC maintains that the public’s interest in access to the Posner affidavit outweighs any public interest in the dignity of the family respondents because of the relevance of the Posner affidavit to the miscarriage of justice that occurred.
 




 
The accused asserts that, in making the publication ban, “this Court did not give any consideration to the well-established principles that apply to publication bans.” He argues that the “facts” set out in the Posner affidavit “are relevant to how [the accused] came to be wrongly convicted” and should have been considered by this Court in determining both whether there had been a miscarriage of justice and the appropriate remedy. Finally, he submits that publication of the Posner affidavit would not “occasion an affront to [the] dignity” of the family respondents.
 




 
We pause to make a few preliminary observations about the accused’s submissions. First, the accused consented to the publication ban and has never appealed it. Second, his arguments run contrary to the presumption that the publication ban was correctly ordered. Third, he contends that the “publication ban deprive[s] [him] of important information pertaining to his miscarriage of justice”—yet he is the one who filed the Posner affidavit, and he has been and remains in possession of the information.
 




 
The Crown says that the Posner affidavit [REDACTED]. The Crown notes that this is precisely the type of sensitive stigmatized condition recognized in Sherman (see para 77), the dissemination of which would impact individual dignity. It asserts that the information in the Posner affidavit does not support an inference that the witness was engaged in wrongdoing relevant to the accused’s wrongful conviction and that a “failure by courts to protect the dignity of the dead would undermine confidence in the integrity of the justice system.” Ultimately, the Crown argues that the irrelevance of the Posner affidavit to the court proceedings makes the potential intrusion on the privacy and dignity of the family respondents unwarranted and “poses a more serious risk to the important public interest in protecting [their] privacy and dignity” than would be the case if the circumstances of the witness’s death were the subject of the court proceedings.
 




 
The family respondents assert that the accused is attempting to elevate the witness’s involvement in the wrongful conviction to something it was not, and they characterize his position as a collateral attack on this Court’s decision in Ostrowski 2018. [REDACTED]. They submit that the privacy rights and dignity interests of the witness and the spouse are inextricably linked because of their close familial relationship. At the end of the day, they argue that the Posner affidavit is irrelevant, inadmissible and “worthless in any evidentiary sense” in that it is not “capable of advancing any reasoned public analysis of the case”.




 Analysis and Decision
 




 
[REDACTED].
 




 
[REDACTED].
 




 
Applying the first branch of the test set out in Sherman, we find that there is a strong public interest in protecting the privacy of the witness and the spouse [REDACTED]. Moreover, disclosure [REDACTED] serves no public purpose. The content of the Posner affidavit is highly sensitive, acutely personal, and goes to the core of both the witness and the spouse as human beings at their most vulnerable. Their dignity interests are most definitely at stake. We conclude that dissemination of this material would result in an affront to their dignity that the public would not tolerate “even in service of open proceedings” (Sherman at para 34; see also para 33) and, as we explain below, would not serve any public interest.
 




 
The second facet of the Sherman test is to determine whether the publication ban is necessary to prevent what we have concluded would be a serious risk to the important public interest of protecting the dignity of the witness and the spouse. 
 




 
This aspect of the test requires a court to “consider whether reasonable alternatives are available” to the publication ban and also to “restrict the order as far as possible without sacrificing the prevention of the risk” (Mentuck at para 36).
 




 
We are not persuaded that the publication ban is overbroad, vague or should not be permanent.
 




 
In our view, publication of any of the details [REDACTED], even with the redaction of the witness’s name, would risk associating the information with the witness and making the publication ban moot. [REDACTED]. It is neither possible nor necessary to perfectly tailor a publication ban to allow for the maximum possible dissemination of information while still ensuring that it achieves its goal. 
 




 
Nor are we convinced that the publication ban is vague. It prevents publication of the information contained in the Posner affidavit. To the extent that the information is repeated in the various briefs and other documents in the Court record, including in these reasons, it is subject to the publication ban. Due to the sensitivity of the information and its irrelevance to the accused’s wrongful conviction, we are not persuaded that the publication ban should be limited in time.
 




 
In conclusion, we are not persuaded that there is a reasonable alternative available to the terms of the publication ban.
 




 
Finally, the third part of the Sherman test requires a court to weigh the benefits of the publication ban against its negative effects and, in particular, its “effects on the right to free expression, which in turn is connected to the principle of open and accessible court proceedings” (Sierra Club at para 69).
 




 
As we have already explained, the benefit of the publication ban is to protect the intensely private information of the witness and the spouse from dissemination and from the affront to their dignity that would result. 
 




 
On the other hand, the publication ban has a minimal, if any, negative effect on the principle of open and accessible court proceedings.
 




 
The accused has argued that [REDACTED] are “indicative of wrong-doing on [the witness’s] part, and therefore relevant to the formation and subsequent suppression of the Lovelace deal.” He also asserts that these facts “are relevant to how [the accused] came to be wrongly convicted.”
 




 
We disagree.
 




 
Looking at the Posner affidavit as a whole, it does not support the inference that the witness had a guilty conscience or was aware of wrong-doing that had any relevance to the wrongful conviction. As we have explained, the only reasonable inference that can be drawn from the Posner affidavit is that [REDACTED].
 




 
The Posner affidavit has nothing to do with the wrongful conviction or with the legitimacy of the accused’s appeal. [REDACTED]. 
 




 
As previously indicated, the Posner affidavit was not admitted as evidence in these proceedings. The fresh evidence motion was dismissed on the basis that the Posner affidavit was not relevant to the only issue left for this Court to decide, being the remedy to which the accused was entitled for his wrongful conviction. However, in our view, it would not have been admissible in connection with the issue of whether a wrongful conviction occurred because it is irrelevant and unreliable. Simply put, it is capable of proving nothing. And it certainly does not, in any possible way, support the inference pressed upon this Court by the accused and the CBC. Moreover, we agree with the family respondents that “[r]eleasing [the Posner affidavit] would serve to distort the public analysis and mislead.”
 




 
There is no question that the public interest in court proceedings is critically significant. Indeed, the “importance of the open court principle is difficult to overstate” (R v Nygard, 2021 MBCA 42 at para 17). However, publication of the Posner affidavit would not advance the public interest in open court proceedings.
 




 
To summarize, the benefits of the publication ban significantly outweigh the minimal deleterious effect on the right to free expression. 
Conclusion
 




 
The witness was [REDACTED] with, by all accounts, an unblemished professional and personal reputation. Nothing about the Posner affidavit changes that. It sheds no light on the wrongful conviction of the accused. Instead, it opens a window into excruciatingly personal details [REDACTED]. This is a devastating private tragedy, the publication of which would not advance the public purpose of court openness but, rather, would harm the public interest of protecting the dignity of individuals [REDACTED].
 




 
We would dismiss the motion without costs. 
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/mb/ca/2023mbca1.html
 






 
The accused has appealed his conviction before a judge alone on one count of sexual interference for which he received a six-year sentence. Pending his appeal, he sought judicial interim release pursuant to section 679(1)(a) of the Criminal Code. After hearing submissions, I dismissed the application with brief reasons to follow. These are those reasons.
 






 
At trial, the Crown led evidence from the accused’s daughter (the victim) that, at the age of 12, she awoke to find the accused taking inappropriate photographs of her. She left the home immediately after calling her mother at work and was picked up by her maternal aunt and uncle shortly after. She did not return to the home until some weeks later, after a lock had been placed on her bedroom door at the direction of her maternal grandfather. She testified that, prior to this incident, she had been sexually abused by the accused a number of times, but had feigned sleep and had not reported any of this to her mother. The uncle was called to confirm the fact that he was involved in picking up the victim on the night in question.
 






 
The accused testified, acknowledging that an incident occurred where the victim was picked up in the middle of the night but denied allegations of inappropriate conduct on his part and indicated that the victim had refused to indicate what the problem was. The mother testified to the same effect.
 






 
The trial judge’s decision, after conducting a W(D) analysis (see R v W(D), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), 1 SCR 742), was that she did not find the accused’s evidence believable, nor the mother’s. She found frailties in the victim’s testimony but did not believe it went to the core of her evidence, while she found what she considered to be inconsistencies in the evidence of the parents and aspects of it which she did not believe made logical sense.
 






 
The grounds for appeal are twofold: (1) that the trial judge applied uneven scrutiny to the evidence of the accused and his wife as compared to that of the victim; and (2) the verdict was unreasonable as the trial judge failed to properly consider the evidence of the accused and his wife in light of the family dynamics and the Filipino culture in which they lived.
 






 
The parties agree that the accused has met the first two criteria for a successful application for release, namely, that he has raised grounds that establish that the application is not frivolous and that there is no concern that the accused will surrender himself into custody when necessary.
 






 
As to the third criteria, that the detention is not necessary in the public interest, there is no serious concern that the accused will re-offend. However, the Crown raises the argument that the tension between enforceability and reviewability favours enforceability on the facts of this case as the grounds of appeal are, in its submission, “just beyond frivolous”.
 






 
The leading case, as discussed before me, is R v Oland, 2017 SCC 17, which draws upon the previous case of R v Farinacci (1993), 1993 CanLII 3385 (ON CA), 86 CCC (3d) 32 (Ont CA), to provide guidance on how an appellate judge should consider whether detention is necessary in the public interest. After reviewing the principles with respect to the enforceability and reviewability interests, Moldaver J, for the Court, in discussing the final balancing, stated as follows (at paras 50-51): That said, where the applicant has been convicted of murder or some other very serious crime, the public interest in enforceability will be high and will often outweigh the reviewability interest, particularly where there are lingering public safety or flight concerns and/or the grounds of appeal appear to be weak: R. v. Mapara, 2001 BCCA 508, 158 C.C.C. (3d) 312, at para. 38; Baltovich [R v Baltovich (2000), 2000 CanLII 5680 (ON CA), 144 CCC (3d) 233 (Ont CA in chambers)], at para. 20; Parsons [R v Parsons, 1994 CarswellNfld 14 (CA)], at para. 44.
 
On the other hand, where public safety or flight concerns are negligible, and where the grounds of appeal clearly surpass the “not frivolous” criterion, the public interest in reviewability may well overshadow the enforceability interest, even in the case of murder or other very serious offences.
 






 
As I indicated briefly at the hearing of the application, given the seriousness of the offence, the strong evidentiary findings against the accused and this Court’s pronouncements on the difficulty of successfully appealing on at least one of the grounds advanced by the accused, I concluded that, on the facts of this case, reviewability did not have a strong hand. I was also taken by the comments of Jackson JA in R v LSR, 2008 SKCA 77 (in chambers), where, on a similar application, she stated that a short period of release, back into a small community, which may very well end in reincarceration, will have a negative impact on the public’s confidence in the administration of justice. For these reasons, the accused has not persuaded me that his detention pending appeal is not in the public interest.
 






I accordingly dismissed the application but set the matter down for a hearing in the next few months, along with guidelines to the parties on the filing of material. 
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/mb/ca/2023mbca5.html
 






 
The accused appeals his convictions for assault of his common law partner, C.D., and two of her children, S. and C., as well as sexual interference against C.D.’s youngest child, K. He contends that the trial judge erred by applying a stricter standard of scrutiny to the defence evidence than to the evidence of the Crown’s witnesses; and that the verdicts are unreasonable because the trial judge’s assessments of credibility and reliability of the witnesses are not supported by a reasonable review of the evidence. 
 






 
Following the hearing, we dismissed the appeal with reasons to follow. These are those reasons.
 






 
At trial, C.D. and her children testified to multiple instances of assault committed by the accused in the family home. K. further described the accused sexually abusing her, both repeatedly in the family home, and, on June 12, 2018, in the barn on the rural property on which the home was situate. She said that, in the barn, the accused made her lick his penis and kissed her. K. also testified that, following the June 12, 2018 incident, she went from the barn to her bedroom and was crying, at which point she made disclosure to her mother. C.D. essentially confirmed that these were the circumstances of the disclosure. Immediately thereafter, C.D. fled the home with her children, and she and K. went to make a report to the police.
 






 
The accused testified, attempting to paint himself as a disciplinarian and authority figure, and denying the offences against S., C. and C.D. He also denied any sexual abuse of K.
 






 
The trial judge rejected the accused’s denials and accepted the core evidence of the Crown’s witnesses, except S. (about whom he had reliability concerns). He convicted the accused of all counts in the indictment except in relation to one alleged assault and one count of uttering threats, both against S. 
 






 
A trial judge’s credibility findings are owed great deference and may only be interfered with where they cannot be supported on any reasonable view of the evidence (see R v Wright, 2013 MBCA 109 at para 53). 
 






 
As emphasized by this Court in R v Jovel, 2019 MBCA 116, “A claim of uneven scrutiny is easily made, but seldom successful” (at para 38). It is a difficult argument to make because “[i]t must be clear from the trial judge’s reasons, or the record, that different standards were applied” (ibid) (see also R v Bunn, 2022 MBCA 34 at para 16). The mere fact that a trial judge accepts a complainant’s version of events despite contradictory evidence from other witnesses, including the accused, does not establish uneven scrutiny, even if another judge may have assessed credibility differently (see Jovel at para 41). The Supreme Court of Canada has questioned whether uneven scrutiny can constitute a stand-alone ground of appeal or a separate and distinct error of law (see R v Mehari, 2020 SCC 40 at para 1; and R v GF, 2021 SCC 20 at paras 99-101). Rather, “the focus must always be on whether there is reversible error in the trial judge’s credibility findings” (GF at para 100). 
 






 
The standard of review applicable to a claim of unreasonable verdict requires an appellant to establish that the verdict is one that a properly instructed trier of fact, acting judicially, could not reasonably have rendered; or the trial judge has drawn an inference or made a finding of fact essential to the verdict that: (1) is plainly contradicted by the evidence relied upon for that purpose by the trial judge; or (2) is shown to be incompatible with evidence that has not otherwise been contradicted or rejected by the trial judge (see Jovel at para 51). 
 






 
With respect to the offences alleged to have been committed against C.D., S. and C., the trial judge explained why he rejected the accused’s testimony and was satisfied, based on the evidence called by the Crown, of the accused’s guilt of each of the offences for which convictions were entered. In our view, he carefully and evenly assessed all of the evidence, including inconsistencies, related to these offences. 
 






As for the sexual offending said to have occurred against K. in the family home, the trial judge did not believe the accused’s denials but concluded that “there [were] simply too many inconsistencies in the evidence for [him] to conclude that the Crown [had] met its onus” (at para 92).
 






However, it was a different matter with respect to the June 12, 2018 incident. Again, the trial judge did not believe the accused’s evidence or find that it raised a reasonable doubt as to his guilt. 
However, he went on to note that, although there were “slight variations” (at para 94) in K.’s evidence, she was consistent about the key event of the accused making her lick his penis that evening. The trial judge found that discrepancies in her testimony “[were] not material having regard to her age and the lapse of time since the assault took place” (ibid). The trial judge also stated, “Moreover, and while it is not required of victims of sexual assault in order for their evidence to be given weight by the court, she immediately reported what happened to her mother and was visibly upset” (ibid).
 Thus, the trial judge found significant support for K.’s credibility in the circumstances of her disclosure. As we will explain, he was entitled to do so.
 






Prior consistent statements are presumptively inadmissible, and the contents of a prior consistent statement cannot be used to support the prohibited inference that consistency enhances credibility, or that the simple making of a prior consistent statement corroborates in-court testimony (see R v Khan, 2017 ONCA 114 at para 41; and R v Stirling, 2008 SCC 10 at para 7). However, the rule against admission of prior consistent statements is subject to a number of exceptions, one being the narrative as circumstantial evidence exception (recently recognized by this Court in Beaulieu et al v Winnipeg (City of) et al, 2022 MBCA 81 at para 42). 
 






Admissibility on the basis of this exception does not hinge on the mere repetition of the same information. As explained in Khan, “A prior consistent statement can be used not to corroborate the evidence of [a] witness, but to provide the surrounding circumstances and context to evaluate the credibility and reliability of the witness’s in-court testimony” (at para 39; see also R v DK, 2020 ONCA 79 at paras 35, 38, leave to appeal to SCC refused 39107 (2 July 2020). In Bright v R, 2020 NBCA 79, the Court aptly described this exception as permitting the use of prior consistent statements to assess credibility, but only to the extent a logical inference of reliability can be drawn from the manner in which the statement was made and/or its timing (see para 30). 
 






Therefore, despite the paucity of reasons as to why the trial judge disbelieved the accused in connection with the June 12, 2018 incident and found that his evidence in that regard failed to raise a reasonable doubt as to his guilt of sexual interference, we are not persuaded that he made any palpable and overriding error of fact, or any error of law, in his credibility analysis. The context and timing of K.’s disclosure, immediately after the June 12, 2018 incident, distinguished her evidence about that matter from her evidence about the accused’s other sexual offending. 
 






In our view, the trial judge reasonably assessed all of the evidence. The claim of uneven scrutiny has not been established. 
 






Finally, we are not persuaded that any of the verdicts are unreasonable. The record reasonably supports all of the conclusions the trial judge reached, and he did not draw any inference or make any finding of fact essential to the verdicts that was tainted by reviewable error. 
 






For the foregoing reasons, the appeal was dismissed.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/mb/ca/2023mbca8.html
 






 
The accused appeals his convictions for multiple offences committed against his wife (A.A.) and their four children over a period of approximately two years. The trial judge found that the accused had repeatedly assaulted A.A. and the children, with and without weapons, and forcibly confined and threatened them—and that he had violently raped A.A. The accused also seeks leave to appeal and, if granted, appeals his total sentence of 13 years’ imprisonment.
 






 
Three grounds of appeal are raised: there was a miscarriage of justice due to the ineffective assistance of counsel who represented the accused at the trial (trial counsel); the trial judge erred in denying the accused’s request for an adjournment of the sentencing hearing to allow him to obtain new counsel; and the sentence was harsh and excessive. 
 






 
In support of both his conviction and sentence appeals, the accused has brought a motion for the admission of fresh evidence, which includes medical records and reports that offer diagnoses for him of unspecified psychotic disorder and delusional disorder. The Trial
 






 
At trial, the Crown led evidence that, for approximately two years starting in August 2016, the accused had engaged in repeated violent behaviour against A.A. and their children. There was also evidence that the accused had begun using illegal substances and had become paranoid in his belief that A.A. was having an affair and that the children were complicit in that. He expressed fears that the children were recording him and hacking his phone, his family and strangers were trying to kill him, and messages were being passed through objects in the home. 
 
 






 
The accused did not testify. He did, however, call as witnesses his brother and the brother’s wife who, while acknowledging that the accused demonstrated controlling and strange behaviour, testified that they did not see any assaults or injuries. 
 






 
No expert evidence was led by the Crown or the defence regarding the accused’s mental status. 
 






 
In closing submissions, trial counsel identified inconsistencies in A.A.’s evidence and argued that the children’s evidence was problematic in various ways.
 






 
The trial judge rejected the testimony of the defence witnesses and found the Crown’s evidence to be credible and consistent. 
He concluded that the accused was guilty of all offences charged except one count each of uttering threats, assault with a weapon and forcible confinement. The Positions of the Parties
 






 
The conviction appeal is based solely on a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel. The accused contends that trial counsel provided ineffective assistance because he did not exercise reasonable professional judgment in dealing with medical evidence and the accused’s failure to testify; cross-examining the victims; and allowing the Crown to adduce hearsay and prejudicial and inadmissible evidence. 
 






The thrust of the accused’s position is that trial counsel failed to explore and advance a defence of not criminally responsible (NCR) under section 16 of the Criminal Code (the Code). 
More specifically, the accused says that trial counsel failed to tender medical evidence regarding his mental status at the time of the offences that would have supported an NCR defence. As a consequence, the verdicts are unreliable and, thus, a miscarriage of justice has occurred. 
 






Section 16 of the Code provides:
 
Defence of mental disorder 16(1) No person is criminally responsible for an act committed or an omission made while suffering from a mental disorder that rendered the person incapable of appreciating the nature and quality of the act or omission or of knowing that it was wrong.
 
Presumption (2) Every person is presumed not to suffer from a mental disorder so as to be exempt from criminal responsibility by virtue of subsection (1), until the contrary is proved on the balance of probabilities.
 
Burden of proof (3) The burden of proof that an accused was suffering from a mental disorder so as to be exempt from criminal responsibility is on the party that raises the issue.
 
 






Furthermore, the accused says that trial counsel dissuaded him from testifying to explain his mental illness—or to deny his involvement. The accused maintains that, even if, as the Crown suggests, the defence strategy was to attempt to impeach the Crown’s witnesses and create an atmosphere of collusion, he still would have had to testify. In all, he asserts that no bona fide defence was put forward on his behalf.
 






The Crown acknowledges that the accused has a mental illness, which resulted in paranoid behaviour. However, the Crown takes the position that some of the fresh evidence is not admissible under the rules of evidence and, in any event, none of it should be admitted as it could not reasonably have affected the outcome of the trial. The Crown says that the claim of ineffective assistance must fail. 
 






With respect to the sentence appeal, the accused argues that the trial judge erred by not allowing an adjournment of the hearing, which would have allowed him to obtain and present medical information about his mental illness that could have been used to attenuate his moral culpability. He further appeals on the basis that, in light of the fresh evidence, the sentence imposed was demonstrably unfit.
 






The Crown submits that there is no basis for interference with the trial judge’s discretionary decision regarding the adjournment, and that the fresh evidence is also not admissible on the sentence appeal because it could not reasonably have affected the outcome. In the Crown’s submission, the sentence was fit given the egregious circumstances of the offences and the accused’s high degree of moral blameworthiness, as well as the need to protect the accused’s family from him. 
The Conviction Appeal Ineffective Assistance of Counsel
 






The jurisprudence recognizes that there is a strong presumption in favour of competence of counsel (see R v Rhodes (KHC), 2015 MBCA 100 at para 18).
 






Briefly, in order to succeed with a claim of ineffective assistance, three components must be established: (1) an appellant must establish a factual foundation for the claim (the factual component); (2) if the factual foundation has been made out, incompetence is assumed and an appellant must show that the assumed incompetence resulted in a miscarriage of justice (the prejudice component); and (3) an appellant must show that counsel’s performance was actually incompetent (the performance component) (see R v Le (TD), 2011 MBCA 83 at para 189; R v Owens, 2018 MBCA 94 at para 49; and R v Mazhari-Ravesh, 2022 MBCA 63 at para 26).
 






There are three routes to a miscarriage of justice due to ineffective assistance provided by a trial lawyer. As stated by this Court in Mazhari-Ravesh (at para 21): 
 
There are three routes to a miscarriage of justice due to ineffective representation by a trial lawyer (although there may be some overlap), being ineffective representation that affected the reliability of the verdict, or that affected the fairness of the trial process (see Joanisse [R v Joanisse (1995), 1995 CanLII 3507 (ON CA), 102 CCC (3d) 35 (OntCA)] at pp 55-64), or that undermined the fairness of the trial or the appearance of trial fairness (see R v Mehl, 2021 BCCA 264 at paras 140-44.) The remedy for a miscarriage of justice is at least a new trial (see Joanisse at p 57; and DGM at para 4).
 
 






I would characterize the accused’s focus as being on a claim that the ineffective assistance of trial counsel affected the reliability of the verdicts. 
Reliability of the Verdicts




 The Trial Record
 






A review of the record reveals no factual foundation for the accused’s allegations of ineffective assistance based on a failure to effectively cross-examine the Crown’s witnesses, and allowing the Crown to adduce prejudicial and inadmissible evidence without objection. 
 






While the accused generally says that the cross-examination was inadequate, he has provided no specifics as to how trial counsel should have done more or questioned witnesses differently, except to say that, if the defence was collusion, he should have been more focused on that. In my assessment, trial counsel, confronted with consistent and corroborative evidence of A.A. and the three children who testified, as well as ambiguities in the accused’s police statement, faced a challenging task in questioning the Crown’s witnesses. During final argument, he attempted to provide the trial judge with details that would result in the rejection of their testimony. In the circumstances, ineffective assistance has not been established on the basis of inadequate cross-examination. 
 






The accused has also provided no specific examples of trial counsel allowing the Crown to adduce prejudicial and inadmissible evidence without objection. This argument can be readily dismissed.




 The Fresh Evidence Motion
 






The accused’s other allegations of ineffective assistance hinge on his motion to adduce the fresh evidence, which is comprised of: 
(1)

 the affidavits of the accused and A.A. (now his ex-wife) about him having symptoms of mental illness during the time of the domestic violence; (2)

 an arrest report dated May 6, 2018 and a police narrative dated October 16, 2018, related to the accused’s arrests on each of those dates, in which police officers mention mental health concerns regarding the accused; 
(3)

 the following medical records and reports (the medical fresh evidence) outlining the accused’s mental health issues: 
(a)

 
Dr. Robert Kosier’s application for involuntary psychiatric assessment dated June 8, 2018 and Dr. Ken Zimmer’s discharge summary dated June 29, 2018, in connection with the accused’s hospital admission in June 2018; (b)

 the reports of Drs. Daniel Globerman and Frank Vattheuer, forensic psychiatrists, who saw the accused while he was in remand custody; 
(c)

 
the report of Dr. Jeffrey Waldman, a forensic psychiatrist, who saw the accused while in custody post-conviction and prior to the sentencing; and (d)

 the report of Dr. Mansfield Mela, a forensic psychiatrist who assessed the accused at the request of his appellate counsel.
 






In the accused’s affidavit, he also indicates that he advised trial counsel of his significant mental health issues and that he wanted to use, at his trial (and sentencing), information that could be obtained from Drs. Globerman and Vattheuer. The accused swears that he attempted to explain to trial counsel that his actions were “all predicated on delusional paranoid beliefs about [his] family”, but trial counsel did not obtain or tender medical evidence regarding his mental status. The accused further swears that trial counsel pressured him not to testify. He says that, as a consequence of his failure to testify, the trial judge was deprived of his evidence as to a potential defence based on his mental illness. 
 






The jurisdiction to admit fresh evidence on appeal is set out in section 683(1) of the Code, which makes the evidence admissible if it is “in the interests of justice” to do so. The usual criteria governing the admissibility of fresh evidence under section 683(1) were set out in Palmer v The Queen, 1979 CanLII 8 (SCC), 1 SCR 759, being that: (1) the evidence should not generally be admitted if, by due diligence, it could have been adduced at trial, although this is not applied as strictly in a criminal case; (2) the evidence must be relevant in the sense that it bears upon a decisive or potentially decisive issue at trial; (3) the evidence must be credible in that it is reasonably capable of belief; and (4) the evidence must be such that, if believed, it could reasonably, when considered with the other evidence, be expected to have affected the result (see p 775).
 






Where fresh evidence is sought to be admitted in support of an allegation of ineffective assistance said to have rendered a verdict unreliable, the test in Palmer is modified, recognizing, in particular, that a different approach is necessary with respect to the criterion of due diligence. 
 






In R v Zamrykut, 2017 MBCA 24, this Court adopted the test set out in R v Aulakh, 2012 BCCA 340 for the admission of fresh evidence in support of an allegation that the ineffective assistance of counsel affected the reliability of the verdict. This test requires that: (1) the fresh evidence must be admissible pursuant to the rules of evidence; (2) even if admissible, the fresh evidence will not be admitted if it could not reasonably have affected the result; (3) if this is not apparent and the fresh evidence is relevant and credible, it should be admitted for the limited purpose of determining the issue of ineffective assistance; (4) the court must then determine whether, in light of the fresh evidence, the performance component of the test for ineffective assistance has been established; and (5) if the performance component is met, the accused must establish the prejudice component. If the final component is met, the fresh evidence is admitted and the appeal allowed. If not, the fresh evidence motion should be dismissed (see Zamrykut at para 3; see also R v Dyck, 2019 MBCA 81 at para 54; and Mazhari-Ravesh at para 28). 
 






Applying the test in Zamrykut, I turn to a consideration of the admissibility of the fresh evidence proffered in this case in support of the accused’s argument that the ineffective assistance of trial counsel affected the reliability of the verdicts. With respect to the accused’s affidavit (as it relates to his medical status), the affidavit of A.A., as well as the arrest report, police narrative and the medical fresh evidence, I have concerns as to relevancy, as required under the first part of the test for admission, because they do not speak directly to matters relevant to conviction. 
In any event, as I will explain, they fail the second part of the Zamrykut test as they could not reasonably have affected the verdicts.
 






These documents, although detailing issues about the accused’s behaviour and mental health, do not support a finding that he was NCR for the offences charged due to mental illness—that is, that he was suffering from a mental disorder that rendered him incapable of appreciating the nature and quality of his actions or knowing that they were wrong (see the Code at section 16(1)), and certainly no proof of that on a balance of probabilities (see section 16(2)). Even Dr. Mela, in his report, does no more than opine that the effects of the accused’s mental disorder “could have impacted his potential defences to the charges” (emphasis added). 
 






Moreover, an NCR defence was seemingly not viable in that the accused, in his police statement, denied any assault of A.A. or the children. He also told Dr. Mela, when asked whether his hallucinations and delusions could have caused him to threaten his family or to commit sexual assault and assault, that “there was no way those happened in the first place.”
 While the accused argues that his denials were also the result of his delusions, there is no medical support for that position. 
 






As for the part of the accused’s affidavit which states that he made the choice not to testify because he was pressured by trial counsel, the Crown concedes that it should be admitted for the limited purpose of assessing the accused’s assertion that trial counsel’s representation was ineffective. 
 






In his affidavit, the accused swears that there were a number of discussions between him and trial counsel about whether he should testify and that he signed a written instruction indicating his desire to testify. Attached to the affidavit filed in support of the fresh evidence is an undated, signed instruction that appellate counsel for the accused obtained from trial counsel, in which the accused states his choice to testify despite advice from trial counsel not to do so. The accused says that this instruction was signed less than a week prior to the trial. He further explains that, at the close of the Crown’s case, he felt pressured by trial counsel not to testify, so he “changed [his] mind at the last minute” and “agreed not to testify”.
 






The part of the accused’s affidavit that deals with his choice not to testify also fails the preliminary assessment of prejudice to be made at the second part of the Zamrykut test. He has not shared exactly what his evidence would have been had he taken the stand. In his affidavit, he states that he wanted to testify to “explain [his] state of mind at the time”, and speak to “all the paranoid thoughts and beliefs [he] held during the relevant time”. However, as I have already outlined, there was evidence before the Court about the accused’s irrational and paranoid behaviour. Nothing in the accused’s proposed evidence addresses the specific criteria of an NCR defence. 
Furthermore, as also noted, any such defence would have been compromised by the fact that the accused maintains that he also wanted to testify in order to deny his involvement in the alleged offences. And, he would have done so in the face of what the trial judge found to be consistent allegations made by A.A. and the children. 
 






Although not necessary given the above analysis, I add this with respect to the fourth (performance) part of the Zamrykut test. Clearly, there had been extensive discussions between trial counsel and the accused as to whether he should testify; his decision was not uninformed (see R v DA, 2020 ONCA 738 at paras 32-33). The accused has provided no details of the pressure allegedly exerted by trial counsel. Ultimately, it was the accused who made the decision not to testify. 
 






Therefore, I would dismiss the fresh evidence motion as it relates to a challenge to the reliability of the verdicts based on a claim of ineffective assistance. 
 






Considering the conclusions I have reached based on a review of the trial record and given the dismissal of the fresh evidence motion, I would dismiss the accused’s claim that the ineffective assistance of trial counsel affected the reliability of the verdicts, resulting in a miscarriage of justice. 
Fairness of the Trial Process
 






The accused also argues that, regardless of the reliability of the verdicts, trial counsel’s representation was ineffective because his cumulative conduct permeated the entire trial so as to render the adjudicative process unfair. 
 






Where fresh evidence is directed at the fairness of the trial process, the Palmer criteria are not applicable. Rather, in determining the admissibility of fresh evidence sought to be adduced to challenge the fairness of the trial process, the appellate court must conduct “an examination of the grounds of appeal raised, the material tendered, and the remedy sought” which may include “material extraneous to the trial record” (see R v Richard (DR) et al, 2013 MBCA 105 at para 204). The applicability of this test has been recognized in cases involving allegations of ineffective assistance of counsel said to have rendered the adjudicative process unfair (see R v Dunbar, Pollard, Leiding and Kravit, 2003 BCCA 667 at para 36; R v Yellowhead, 2015 BCCA 389 at para 27; and Mazhari-Ravesh at para 30). 
 






Even admitting the fresh evidence on the basis of the test outlined in Richard for the purpose of the accused’s challenge to the fairness of the trial process, I would not accede to his argument. Examples, in the jurisprudence, of ineffective assistance of counsel resulting in a miscarriage of justice due to an unfair trial process include counsel being impaired during a trial; counsel being in a conflict of interest; counsel failing to include the accused in a fundamental decision; counsel failing to follow the client’s instructions (see Mazhari-Ravesh at para 23); or very significant incompetence (see R v TB, 2011 ONCA 404; see also R v Hamzehali, 2017 BCCA 290). This case is markedly different from those situations. While trial counsel’s overall performance could have been better, I am not persuaded that the trial was fundamentally unfair.
 






For the foregoing reasons, the accused has failed to establish a miscarriage of justice. I would dismiss the conviction appeal. 
The Sentence Appeal The Trial Judge’s Refusal to Adjourn the Sentencing
 






The accused asserts that, after he attempted to discharge trial counsel at the sentencing hearing, the trial judge erred by denying that request and refusing to adjourn the sentencing. The accused’s stated reason for the adjournment before the trial judge was that he wanted new representation. He says that the denial of the adjournment prejudiced his ability to marshal evidence about his mental health that would have impacted the sentencing. 
 






I am not convinced that there is a basis for interference with the trial judge’s highly discretionary decision to refuse the adjournment. At the time the adjournment was sought, there was no suggestion that the accused wished to obtain additional information or reports. The trial judge recognized the gravity of the offences and the passage of time since the charges were first laid, and his decision not to delay the sentencing is owed deference. Even if the refusal of the adjournment compromised the accused’s ability to obtain medical information regarding his mental status, that concern is addressed by the conclusion I have reached regarding the admission of the fresh evidence on the substantive sentence appeal, as set out below. Fitness of the Sentence 
 






An appellate court can only intervene to vary a sentence if it is demonstrably unfit or the sentencing judge made an error in principle that impacted the sentence (see R v Friesen, 2020 SCC 9 at para 26). 
 






The accused appeals on the ground that the sentence was demonstrably unfit. As part of this ground of appeal, he argues that the trial judge erred in the application of the principle of totality by insufficiently reducing the cumulative sentence of 14.5 years to 13 years—but his focus is clearly on the fresh evidence. He says that the fresh evidence supports a conclusion that he was mentally ill at the time of his offending, such that his moral culpability is reduced. The trial judge made no mention of the accused’s mental status in his sentencing reasons, on the limited information that had been provided to him about the accused’s mental health. 
Thus, according to the accused, he failed to take it into account, making the sentence imposed unfit.
 






Although the accused argues that trial counsel should have tendered further evidence of his mental health issues for sentencing, he does not specifically appeal the sentence on the ground of ineffective assistance. He does, as I have previously mentioned, rely on the fresh evidence to support his sentence appeal.




 The Sentencing Hearing
 






At the sentencing hearing, the Crown sought a total sentence of 23 years’ imprisonment, reduced to 14 years for totality. Trial counsel did not take significant issue with the Crown’s assessment of the sentence for each offence, but suggested that the sentence for the most serious offence, sexual assault, be not six (before totality) but three and one-half to four years—and that all of the other sentences be served concurrently. With that approach and taking into account a credit of 516 days for pre-sentence custody, he submitted that it was possible to impose a sentence of two years less a day going forward, plus three years of supervised probation. 
 






When trial counsel submitted that the pre-sentence report included some comments about the accused’s mental health issues, the trial judge stated that it was “unfortunately—not enough”. Trial counsel then went on to indicate that he had spoken with Dr. Vattheuer, a forensic psychiatrist who had seen the accused while on remand, and that, although he did not have a formal report and Dr. Vattheuer’s comments were “fairly brief”, Dr. Vattheuer had indicated that the accused experienced delusions in relation to A.A. but he “wasn’t able to provide a time frame for when those started or when they might disappear, only that they [were] all retrospective.”
 






Counsel were in disagreement as to whether the accused’s mental health issues should have an impact on the sentence. Trial counsel argued that the accused’s delusions, which resulted from mental illness, played a part in his motivation for the offences; in trial counsel’s submission, the accused’s delusions were “why he does what he does” and were the “underlying cause” of his offending.
 






The Crown took the position that the accused’s mental health issues should not be taken into account, submitting: 
 
. . . 
. . . [W]e don’t have any tie to any mental illness lowering his moral culpability to violence. We don’t have that in this case. We don’t have any report from any therapist or psychiatrist saying that he had some kind of mental illness that caused him to be violent or even connected to his violence. I don’t think there’s any way the Court can take that into account. . . . 
 
 






As already noted, the trial judge did not mention the accused’s mental illness in determining a fit sentence. Given that counsel had not agreed on its impact, I cannot assume that the trial judge, in the absence of comment, took it into account.




 The Fresh Evidence Motion
 






The admission of fresh evidence on sentencing is also governed by the well-known test in Palmer (see R v Lévesque, 2000 SCC 47 at para 16; and R v Catcheway, 2019 MBCA 75 at para 14). 
 






Some authorities have accepted that the criterion of due diligence under Palmer can be met despite concerns about the conduct of counsel. For example, in Catcheway, the accused appealed his three-year sentence for a number of offences, arguing that his disability due to Fetal Alcohol Syndrome Disorder (FASD) reduced his moral culpability and should have shifted the emphasis on sentencing to that of rehabilitation. As it turned out, there were several reports that predated the offence, which contained evidence of FASD that were not presented to the sentencing judge. 
This was the fresh evidence that the accused sought to have admitted on his sentence appeal. The appeal was not specifically framed as one of ineffective assistance of counsel. Rather, the accused’s position was described as being “that the failure to obtain the fresh evidence for the sentencing hearing was an error or oversight by the sentencing lawyer that should not be determinative of the fresh evidence motion” (at para 30). The fresh evidence was admitted under the Palmer criteria, despite the lawyer’s “apparent lack of due diligence [being a significant] concern” (at para 39), because it was in the interests of justice to do so (see also R v AB, 2021 SKCA 119). 
 






Regarding due diligence in this case, trial counsel was in possession of some of the fresh evidence, namely the arrest report, the police narrative and the hospital discharge summary, all of which raised significant concerns about the accused’s mental health. Several of the medical reports that are the subject of the fresh evidence motion relate to assessments conducted prior to the sentencing, which could have been obtained and tendered. 
As well, it would have been apparent from the evidence of lay witnesses at trial that the accused was abusing methamphetamine and was paranoid. However, no medical evidence was presented at the sentencing hearing in support of the accused’s mental disorder. 
 






Given the lack of explanation from trial counsel as to why he did not obtain any reports or more detailed information about the accused’s mental status, I have significant concern about a lack of diligence. 
However, due diligence is only one factor under Palmer and, particularly in criminal cases, it should be assessed in the context of the other circumstances. That is, failure to meet the due diligence criterion should not be used to deny the admission of fresh evidence if it is compelling and in the interests of justice to admit it (see Catcheway at para 15, citing Lévesque at para 15).
 






I will deal first with the arrest report, the police narrative and the affidavits of A.A. and the accused regarding his mental health difficulties. Assuming that they are relevant and credible, I am not persuaded that, under the fourth criterion in Palmer, they could reasonably be expected to have affected the result. A.A. provides further details of the accused’s paranoid and erratic behaviour beyond what she testified to at trial—and the accused’s affidavit confirms his mental health difficulties at the relevant time. However, the fact that all of these documents provide more detail regarding the accused’s mental status and behaviour does not justify admission, given the limited role of appellate courts in sentencing and the importance of finality (see Lévesque at para 34). They are somewhat redundant, and would not likely have affected the result. 
 






The medical fresh evidence, however, is a different matter. As I have stated, it consists of the reports of Drs. Globerman, Vattheuer, Waldman and Mela, as well as Dr. Kosier’s application for involuntary psychiatric assessment dated June 8, 2018 and Dr. Zimmer’s June 2018 discharge summary. These records and reports describe a history of significant mental disorder. They are relevant to sentencing and the Crown acknowledges their credibility and accuracy. 
 






Dr. Zimmer’s discharge summary indicates that, when the accused was admitted to hospital in June 2018 on an involuntary basis for an approximately 20-day stay due to his mental health issues, he was suffering from “[n]on specified psychosis” (this admission occurred shortly after the accused’s initial arrest, in May 2018, for some of the charges now before this Court).
 






The reports of Drs. Globerman and Vattheuer regarding their assessment and treatment of the accused while on remand indicate a diagnosis of unspecified psychotic disorder. Dr. Waldman, who also saw the accused while in custody pre-sentencing, opines that the preferred diagnosis is delusional disorder (paranoid type), as does Dr. Mela, who offers a diagnosis of delusional disorder (mixed type). Despite inconsistencies regarding the timeline, there is some indication in the reports that the accused suffered from the mental disorder before starting to abuse methamphetamine. Since he ceased using that drug, his delusions have diminished, but persisted. 
 






I am of the view that the medical fresh evidence goes well beyond providing further details of the accused’s paranoid behaviour than what was available to the trial judge. At the sentencing, the only information from a medical expert was trial counsel’s submission about Dr. Vattheuer’s advice, which could not tie the mental illness to the timeframe of the offences. The medical fresh evidence establishes that the accused suffered from a significant mental illness at the relevant time. As for the role of the accused’s mental illness in his offending, Dr. Mela states: 
 
. . . 
During that timeline, [the accused] was under the symptoms of auditory hallucinations, persecutory delusions, delusions of reference, and poor awareness about his mental symptoms. He demonstrated impaired judgment and poor decision making in the same time period. . . . . . . 
 
 






In his report, Dr. Mela adds that, although the accused has abstained from the use of methamphetamine, has had adequate treatment with medications, and his erroneous beliefs are currently diminished, “he firmly believed the events at the time.” Dr. Mela further states, “It is my opinion that [the accused] experienced symptoms of mental disorder during the commission of the offenses” and that he was “suffering from the effects of mental disorder in the form of a psychotic disorder so much so that it could have . . . reduce[d] his moral culpability.”
 






In my view, this opinion, together with all of the other evidence and what the medical professionals confirm was the subject matter of the accused’s delusions, support an inference of a connection between his mental illness and the domestic violence. It must be remembered that his delusions were that his wife was having an affair and that the children were part of a conspiracy to conceal that from him.
 






I am satisfied that the medical fresh evidence establishes that the accused’s mental illness undermined his capacity to restrain his urges and impulses in how he dealt with his wife and children, and compromised his understanding of the link between the punishment imposed by the court and his crimes (see R v JMO, 2017 MBCA 59 at para 73; and R v JED, 2018 MBCA 123 at paras 68-76). Thus, the medical fresh evidence establishes that the accused’s mental illness played a role in his criminal conduct and, thereby, reduced his moral culpability. 
 






Therefore, had the medical fresh evidence been presented to the trial judge, it could reasonably have affected the sentence, satisfying the fourth criterion in Palmer. 
 






For the reasons outlined, the interests of justice call for the medical fresh evidence to be admitted on the sentence appeal. Taking that evidence into account, the sentence imposed was, in my view, demonstrably unfit. Therefore, this Court must determine a fit sentence.




 A Fit Sentence 
 






In resentencing the accused, I begin with consideration of the findings and conclusions of the trial judge that are unaffected by the medical fresh evidence (see R v Johnson, 2020 MBCA 10 at para 11). The trial judge recognized that the circumstances of these offences are profoundly troubling. The accused is a man who, for over two years, terrorized his family. The seriousness of the offences and the number of victims and offences call for the principles of denunciation and deterrence to be given priority. 
 






The trial judge also appreciated that, although the accused has no criminal record, the pre-sentence report notes numerous instances of institutional misconduct. While the accused suffered childhood trauma and loss in Afghanistan and Iran, the pre-sentence report indicates that he has no insight into his moral culpability, the harm he has caused, or his future risk and need for rehabilitation.
 






 Nonetheless, the medical fresh evidence, namely expert evidence of the accused’s mental illness at the time of the offences, attenuates his moral culpability so as to render the sentence imposed unfit. 
Resentencing the accused, I would conclude that a fit total sentence that reflects his reduced moral culpability due to mental disorder is 10.5 years. 
The sentence for each offence, using the same approach as the trial judge with respect to concurrent and consecutive sentences and, essentially, his assessment of the length of sentence for each offence in relation to the others (before totality), is set out below. Like the trial judge, I would reduce the total sentence by one and one-half years on account of the application of the principle of totality; the allocation to each offence is noted. 
 






Therefore, the total sentence is nine years. 
 
Offences
Sentence
Sentence after totality
Assaults against the four children 
Counts 2-5
8.5 months consecutive on each count = 34
 months
7.5 months consecutive on each count = 30 months
Assault against A.A. Count 1
17.5 months consecutive to Count 5
15.5 months consecutive to Count 5
Assault cause bodily harm against A.A. Count 16
13 months consecutive to Count 1
11 months consecutive to Count 1
Assault with weapon against A.A. Count 12
13 months concurrent to Count 6
 
Assault with weapon against the child Di.K. Count 14
13 months concurrent to Count 12
 
Assault with weapon against the child M.K. Count 15
13 months concurrent to Count 14
 
Sexual assault against A.A. 
Count 6
26 months consecutive to Count 15
22 months consecutive to Count 15
Uttering threats against A.A. and three of the children 
Counts 7-10
8.5 months concurrent to one another, consecutive to Count 6
6.5 months concurrent to one another, consecutive to Count
 6
Unlawful confinement of A.A. and three of the children 
Counts 17-20
17.5 months concurrent to one another,
 consecutive to Count 10
15.5 months concurrent to one another,
 consecutive to Count 10
Six breaches of recognizance
9.5 months concurrent to one another, consecutive to the other sentences
7.5 months concurrent to one another, consecutive to the
 other sentences
Total sentence:
126 months or 10.5 years
108 months or 9 years
 
Conclusion
 






For the foregoing reasons, I would dismiss the fresh evidence motion on the conviction appeal, as well as the conviction appeal. On the sentence appeal, I would admit only the medical fresh evidence. I would allow the sentence appeal and vary the total sentence for the above offences from 13 to nine years (before a credit for pre-sentence custody as determined in the original sentence), with the sentence for each offence as noted above. The ancillary orders remain. 
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/mb/kb/2023mbkb10.html
 
 
The body of Mohamed Mohiadin Ahmed (“Ahmed”) was recovered from the Red River on October 12, 2020. It was evident that foul play was involved as the body was wrapped with multiple coverings and bound by a variety of items including zip ties, tape, plastic cling wrap and ratchet straps. 
 
 
Jesse James Daher (“Daher”) and Evan Daniel Bill Brightnose-Baker (“Brightnose-Baker”) are jointly charged with second-degree murder for causing the death of Ahmed on October 10, 2020. In addition, Daher is charged with pointing a firearm at Jared Martel. 
 
 
The Crown consented to a trial before a judge without a jury, which took place before me over the course of two weeks. Throughout the trial, witnesses and the co-accused were referred to by various names. For the most part, I refer to individuals by their surname. 
 
 
The police investigation determined that Ahmed was beaten and died in a residence at 1046 Royse Avenue (“Royse”) on October 10, 2020. Brightnose-Baker and a masked intruder brandishing a firearm forced Ahmed into the bathroom of the small bungalow. Ahmed could be heard yelling and begging for his life as he was viscously assaulted. 
 
 
The autopsy revealed numerous blunt force trauma and sharp force trauma injuries on the body. The cause of death was extensive blunt force trauma to the head. 
 
 
Upon arrest, Brightnose-Baker gave a statement to the police admitting involvement in the assault of Ahmed. Brightnose-Baker claims when he left the residence, Ahmed was still alive and the evidence against him supports a conviction for manslaughter not murder. I pause to note that the statement from Brightnose-Baker can only be used as evidence against him and it cannot be used as evidence against Daher. 
 
 
Daher submits the evidence falls short of proof beyond a reasonable doubt that he was involved in this matter. There was no physical evidence such as fingerprints or DNA to connect Daher to this homicide. He submits I might be suspicious that he was the masked intruder brandishing a firearm but maintains the Crown has failed to discharge their onus to prove identity beyond a reasonable doubt. 
 
 
The issues to be determined in this trial are identification and the intent required for murder. 
II.

 
Background
 
 
This case involves a violent, senseless death connected to the criminal drug subculture in Winnipeg. The victim and all civilian witnesses who testified are or were heavy drug users. The drug of choice was predominately methamphetamine (“meth”), although some witnesses consumed other hard drugs. The evidence clearly demonstrates that Winnipeg has a serious meth problem. The police and civilian witnesses testified about the crime, danger and violence associated with the criminal drug problem in the city. 

It is clear that all of the witnesses involved in this drug lifestyle understand the code of the street. There is tremendous pressure to remain silent, not to cooperate with the police or prosecution as cooperation or the perception of cooperation will have you labelled a “rat”.Words have power and being labelled a “rat” puts your health and safety at risk. 

At the time of this incident, it is fair to describe Royse as a “flop house”, a place where people go to do drugs. Colin Leiterman (“Leiterman”) and James Freitas (“Freitas”) lived there as roommates and shared the rent. Meghan Burnett (“Burnett”) was the girlfriend of Freitas and she was present on October 10, 2020. I have not heard any evidence from Freitas or Burnett, as they did not attend court. I issued warrants for their arrest on the first day of the trial. I also issued a warrant for the arrest of Terri Sawyer as she failed to attend court in response to her subpoena. 

Leiterman and Jared Martel (“Martel”) were present on October 10, 2020, when Ahmed was attacked at Royce. Both men are serious drug addicts. They attended court in response to their subpoena but it is clear they did not wish to testify. Their credibility and the reliability of their evidence is in question and must be carefully assessed. 

Noreen Kyla Osborne (“Osborne”) was in a relationship with Brightnose-Baker at the time of this incident. They had been together for approximately two years. She comes from a difficult background. She is a drug addict and was in foster placement staying in a group home. She would spend time with her older sister Desiree Thomas and knew Daher as he was in a relationship with Desiree. She described Daher as her sister’s “baby daddy”. Daher and Desiree share two children. 

Osborne turned 18 years old on October 9, 2020, the day before this incident. The police interviewed her on April 27, 2021. She recounted the events surrounding her 18th birthday. She implicated Daher and Brightnose-Baker in the death of Ahmed. She was called to testify in this trial. It is clear she did not wish to participate. She could recall little of what she told the police. I admitted her video-statement into evidence pursuant to the principled exception to hearsay. I will discuss the ultimate reliability of her statement in my reasons. 

The only other civilian witness to testify was Theresa Derendorf (“Derendorf”). She met Desiree Thomas in the Winnipeg drug scene and became close friends. Through Ms. Thomas, she met Daher, Osborne and Brightnose-Baker. She considered this group of people friends. Thomas and Daher moved in with Derendorf in late October 2020. Osborne and Brightnose-Baker would often attend their residence on Austin Street. Derendorf testified about discussions she had with the co-accused who claimed responsibility for the death of Ahmed. 

The evidence I heard demonstrates Daher and Brightnose-Baker spent significant time together and were described as brothers. It is also clear that all of the civilian witnesses and the co-accused knew the victim from his involvement in the drug scene. 
III.
 THE EVIDENCE August 11, 2020

On August 11, 2020, the Winnipeg Police Service (“WPS”) received a report of an assault at 204-505 Victor Street. Cst. Bilodeau and his partner were driving to the location at 9:46 a.m. and came across the victim at 610 Ellice. The officer told me he spoke to the victim who was identified as Ahmed. The officer noted a laceration to the back of his head and that he was bleeding from his neck and hands. The officer called for an ambulance. 

Ahmed told the officer he was at 204-505 Victor when a male named Jesse assaulted him. Ahmed indicated the assault was over money. Ahmed told the officer he did not recall owing anyone money but did identify Jesse as a meth user and dealer. Ahmed indicated he was struck approximately 12 times with a piece of wood before he could get up and leave. 

To be clear, this evidence was not offered for the truth of what happened, it was tendered as the information given to the officer that, in turn, informed the police response to the complaint of assault.

A second police unit attended 204-505 Victor. Cst. Haub testified that he was on scene at 9:49 a.m. He knocked on the door of the suite and a woman named Tanya Hyes answered. The officer had everyone come out of the apartment. In addition to 
Ms. Hyes, the officer identified three males: Chris Geddes, Jesse Daher and Evan Brightnose-Baker.

Computer checks revealed that Brightnose-Baker was listed as a missing person. The officer made further inquiries to deal with the missing person report while Brightnose-Baker was in the rear seat of the police car. 

After identifying all of the people in the suite, the officer received information from the Patrol Sergeant that Ahmed did not wish to have further police involvement in the matter. The police concluded the investigation with no further action. 
Colin Leiterman 

 Leiterman told me he has had a serious drug addiction for a decade. He smokes meth and crack cocaine. He knew Ahmed as Ahmed would attend his residence at Royce to do drugs. Leiterman was arrested on October 14, 2020. He provided a statement to the police. 

Leiterman has a lengthy criminal record including a conviction for indignity to a dead body. That conviction was recorded on June 8, 2021. The conviction was in relation to Leiterman disposing of the body of Ahmed by throwing it into the river. 

Leiterman is a serious drug addict and an uncooperative and unsavoury witness. It is clear he was being less than forthright and truthful. I assess his evidence with a strong Vetrovic caution.
 

Leiterman confirmed he lived at Royce. The house is a small three-bedroom home with a bathroom, kitchen and living room. There is no basement. He lived there with a roommate named James and other roommates who would come and go. He could not recall the surname of James and could not recall the names of any other roommates. 

Leiterman told me he was at his residence with roommates on October 10, 2020. He said James was there with his girlfriend. He does not recall her name. He confirms Ahmed was in house when some masked men came into the house. First, he says it was two men and then three. He was asked to describe the masks. He believes they were balaclavas. He believes both men were masked. He did not recognize the intruders. He was asked about weapons. He described one guy with a metal thing. He tells me it was a gun and he knows the difference between a handgun and long gun. He told me it was a long gun but would not provide further details about the firearm. 

The intruders told Leiterman to get into a room.
 He, James and James’ girlfriend went to the back bedroom. He told me they did not try to leave out the rear door. He is unable to explain why he did not leave. He did not call the police, as he did not have a phone. He did not see anyone else call the police. 

He did not see what happened to Ahmed but he could hear him screaming. He believes Ahmed was screaming because he was scared. Leiterman was provided his statement to refresh his memory and then told me Ahmed was freaking out, he did not want to die. He did not help Ahmed as there was a weapon and believes there was nothing he could do. He said the screaming went on for 20 minutes then backtracks from that answer stating he did not have a stopwatch. 

He told me he heard one of the males call Ahmed a “skinner” or “rat”. After the males left, Leiterman went to check on Ahmed and found him in the bathtub. He saw blood on Ahmed’s hands and head. He was laying in the tub on his back. His hands were in front of him bound together. There was a towel and saran wrap around his hands. 

Leiterman left the residence and a day or two later returned to remove the body. Leiterman wrapped the body in a tarp and other coverings and used a wagon to remove the body from the house to a vehicle.
 He placed the body and the wagon in the vehicle and drove to an area by the Canoe Club where he dumped the body in the Red river.

Leiterman denies assaulting Ahmed in anyway. He denies calling anyone to advise them that Ahmed was in the residence. 

In cross-examination, Leiterman agreed his residence was a place for people to do drugs. He confirmed people would come and go at all hours of the day and night. He advised that the Capri Motel was close by and people from that location would often end up at his residence to do drugs. He was a heavy drug user and described the dangers that went along with the drug lifestyle. His home was previously the site of a home invasion; he has had a gun pulled on him in the past and a crossbow pointed at him. 

He agreed his roommate was James Freitas and his girlfriend was Meghan Burnett. He said both were meth users and in the home on October 10, 2020. He also agrees Jared Martel was there that night. 

He states that he did not see Ahmed being attacked. He maintained he, Freitas and Burnett were in the back bedroom when he could hear the yelling and screaming. 

 When describing intruders, he said it was two guys, then three guys and it could have been four or five guys. He claims the guys were all masked in full dark balaclavas. He could only see eyes. He saw a gun. Later in cross-examination, he advises he told police it was a shotgun that looked like a pistol grip sawed-off, it was a “12”, it was pretty wide. I conclude he is describing a 12 gauge sawed-off shotgun to the police. 

Leiterman cleaned up the washroom after removing the body. He washed out the tub and wiped down surfaces. 
Jared Martel

Martel is 30 years old and a serious drug addict. At the time of this offence, he was using meth daily. He has a lengthy criminal record that includes many property offence convictions. His record is consistent with a person who steals to support their drug habit. As previously noted, his credibility and the reliability of his evidence requires careful scrutiny. Martel did not want to attend court or testify and is concerned about being labelled a “rat”. 

The police located Martel on October 20, 2020. He was arrested on unrelated warrants. He was driven to police headquarters and he provided a statement about this matter. 

Martel knew Ahmed for approximately two years and considered him a friend. He told me Ahmed also had a drug problem and would use meth. Martel also knew James Freitas for approximately three years and described him as a friend and buddy. He knew Freitas had a girlfriend named Meghan. Martel would go to Royse almost every day to get high. He knew Leiterman as he lived with Freitas on Royse. 

Martel also knows the accused Daher. He knew Daher through Terri-Lynn Sawyer. He told me Sawyer lived in an apartment on Furby and he had seen Daher at that suite on four or five occasions. He described Daher as a white male who was tall with a shaved head. He thought Daher was about six feet tall and thin. Martel never had a problem with Daher in the past. 

Martel explained that he was at Royce on October 10, 2020, to get high. He recalls Freitas, Meghan, Leiterman, Ahmed and himself were in the house. At approximately 1:00 a.m., a male came to the house.
 He described the man as native with a medium build and in his 20s. Martel had never before met the man. They were both in the living room, said, “what’s up?” then shook hands and sat down. Ahmed was sitting on the couch and then got up and said “I am gonna dip”, which means to leave. 

The native male stood up and told Ahmed, “Where the fuck do you think you are going?” The native male had a collapsible baton in his hands. He used it to strike Ahmed in the collarbone. It was a hard strike. He hit Ahmed two more times, once in the shoulder and then in the face. Martel wanted “to get the fuck out of there”. He got up to flee and the native male struck him twice with the baton on the left arm. Martel demonstrated in court how he raised his left arm to block the baton. He told me the baton struck his left hand and he had some bruising injury to his left pinky finger and the outside area of the left hand where the pinky finger meets the hand. The police photographed the hand injury on October 20, 2020, and the photographs are in Exhibit No. 9.

 Martel told me while this was going on, another male came into the house and was in the living room. The male had a gun, a sawed-off shotgun. He pointed it at people in the house including Ahmed. The armed male told Martel to “get the fuck out of the way”. 

Martel told me the armed male looked like Daher.
 The male was wearing a facemask or balaclava. He believes it was black nylon material. It covered his face and his nose. The male was wearing a black hat.
 Martel could only see the area around the eyes and he did not recognize the voice. 

Exhibit 10 is the photo lineup Martel reviewed on October 20, 2020, when he spoke to the police. The lineup was captured by video. It is clear that Martel recognizes photograph number six as the officer continues to show the remaining four photographs. The officer asks if he recognized anyone and Martel nods in agreement. The officer asks if he remembers the number of the photograph and Martel responds, number eight. That was clearly an error about the number and not the photograph. They go through the lineup a second time and Martel selects number six. Martel explains that number six is a photograph of Daher. He agrees Daher is the person who pointed the gun at him. 

In his testimony, Martel denied the armed male threatened him with the gun. Martel got out of the house and went to the Capri.
 He never tried to help Ahmed. As he was fleeing, he heard Ahmed loudly yelling, “Stop” and he said Ahmed sounded scared. 

Martel was asked what he told the police about the gun being pointed at him. He said he told the police it was not pointed at him. The Crown provided his statement to refresh his memory. Martel then told me the gun was pointed at him when he was told to “get the fuck out of the way” but he does not believe it was intentional. He is unable to explain why he believes it was unintentional. 

On cross-examination, Martel said there could have been other people present. He believes a woman named Rochelle was there and although there could have been others, he does not recall who they were. 

He is a heavy drug user and agrees it can mess up your memory. He was snorting and smoking meth on the night of this incident. He was very high and has a fuzzy memory of what went on that night. 

He agreed meth users can become aggressive but it depends because not all people get angry or aggressive. He was asked about Jayson Borden who he knows but does not recall being at the house. He was asked about Kingsley Bruce and told me he does not know him and does not know if he was at Royse. 

He was asked about Ahmed and if he was a guy who ripped people off. At first, he told me Ahmed did not do that sort of thing but later reviewed his statement and agreed he told police Ahmed ripped people off. He was asked if that was a bad reputation. He told me his reputation is worse than ripping people off because he was testifying. 

 He told police Ahmed and Rochelle had a problem because she called Ahmed a “skinner”. It was suggested being known as a rat or skinner were bad and Martel agreed. It was suggested Rochelle was in the house that night and he responded, “I think so”. 

Martel said three or four guys could have entered the house. He is asked about the white guy. It was put to him that he told police it looked like Jesse and he could not say for sure it was Jesse. He agreed he could not be sure. He told police the guy was about six feet tall and agrees Jesse is six foot three and that is a noticeable difference. Martel acknowledged the facemask covered most of the intruder’s face. He is unable to say if he had a shaved head or if he had hair. There were no unique identifiers visible on the part of the face he could see. He did not recognize the voice when the armed masked intruder spoke. 

He confirms it was a sawed-off shotgun but cannot say if the individual was wearing gloves. He said it is possible the guy with the gun left at the same time that he did. He is asked questions about the gun. He acknowledged the armed intruder moved around and the gun moved with him. He agrees the gun was never pointed at him but rather traveled by his direction as the guy moved around holding the gun. 

He cannot say if anyone entered the house after he left. He was asked if a guy called Gordie was there and he said no. He was asked about a bald skinny guy and guy called Blair and he did not recall those people being at the house. It was suggested that the death of Ahmed was the talk of the neighbourhood. Martel told me he heard it on the news. He does not know if it was discussed at the Capri motel. He denied a guy named Lindsay told him details of this incident. 

Martel gave his statement to the police on October 20, 2020. By that time, he had heard that a body had been recovered from the river prior to giving his statement. He also heard more news about the incident after he gave his statement to the police. 

He was asked about what happened when the guy with the gun came in and he replied he just wanted to get out of there. He was struck with the baton after the guy with the gun entered the residence. He agrees he cannot remember the sequence of events. He recalled Ahmed screaming.
 Martel told me he is uncertain who had the baton but is certain he was struck with the baton. He agreed he did not seek medical attention.


He was arrested about one year later on October 27, 2021. At that time, Martel reviewed a photo line-up and selected photo No. 4, which was the photograph of Brightnose-Baker. By that time, he had seen news reports about the suspects in this case. He agreed that one of the photographs in the line up was the same photograph that he seen in the news. He is unable to say if he selected the photograph because he recognized the individual from the incident or if it was because he recognized the photograph from media reports. 
Noreen Kyla Osborne

Osborne turned 18 on October 9, 2020. She and Brightnose-Baker came to the attention of the police on April 27, 2021. They were picked up at 278 Salter. They provided videotaped statements to the police. It is clear from their statements that they cared for each other and were in a serious relationship for approximately two years. Osborne explained her relationship to Daher through her sister Desiree Thomas. Osborne is close to Daher and called him her brother. It is clear she was close to Brightnose-Baker and Daher and had no desire to get them in trouble. 

In her statement, Osborne told the police she, Desiree, Daher and Brightnose-Baker were staying in the same residence around the time of her 18th Birthday. I am uncertain of the exact address as the evidence alludes to 737 Beverley, 737 Sargent and 2-320 Toronto. I suspect it was the Toronto Street address as the police had dropped her off at that location on October 9, 2020. She explained it was her cousin’s spot, meaning his home, but her cousin was never there. 

Osborne explained Brightnose-Baker looked up to Daher and considered him a big brother. At the time of the incident, I note Brightnose-Baker was 21 years old and Daher was 28. 

Osborne and Brightnose-Baker were sleeping in a back room when Daher came in and woke up Brightnose-Baker. Daher told Brightnose-Baker to “get ready, let’s go”. The two men left the residence and she did not see them until late the next day. 

When the two men returned to the residence, she saw blood on Brightnose-Baker’s clothes. He hand washed his jeans in the tub, as there was no washer or dryer in the residence. She told the police Brightnose-Baker threw out his shoes. She recalled there was some discussion and the two men said they did it. Osborne went on to explain Daher said it first and she recalls he was smiling as if he was proud of it. Through the discussion, she quickly figured out they were speaking about Ahmed. She knew Ahmed as she had previously met him a few times at her sister’s old spot on Toronto. Near the end of her statement, she confirms it was Daher who said, “we killed him, we killed Moe”. 

She told the officers there was an earlier incident when they beat up Ahmed. She believes it was because he ripped people off and another reason was they believed he was a “skinner”. After that incident, Osborne told the police Daher and Brightnose-Baker talked about killing Ahmed. 

After Ahmed’s death, Osborne explained the two men were acting like they were proud of what they did. She explained they were bragging about it but it was mostly Daher. They said they dragged Ahmed into the bathroom and beat him up. She said Ahmed was hit in the head and went on to explain he was hit with the top of the toilet tank lid and she thinks that is when Ahmed was knocked out. The discussion led her to believe it was Daher who struck Ahmed in the head with the toilet tank lid. She also speculates that they shot him because they previously said they would shoot Ahmed. She believes they had access to a sawed-off shotgun that they kept in their residence. 

She also guesses they stabbed him because they always carried knives. She told the police Brightnose-Baker told her that James was to get rid of the body by throwing it into the river. James was supposed to stab the lungs so the body would sink. The two men mentioned something about James forgetting to stab the lungs. She believes the death happened at James’ place. She recalls them talking about blood everywhere, there was blood on the walls and it was hard to clean up. She told the police it was weird because all the stuff to clean up a body was already there. 

Counsel for Daher cross-examined Osborne noting she gave her statement to the police approximately six months after Ahmed was killed. She agreed her memory would fade with time. Counsel focused on her drug use. She was a heavy drug user who smoked and injected meth in 2020 and 2021. She agreed meth messed up her head. Things can be confused and it is difficult to remember. She would be paranoid. She acknowledged that meth can cause audio and visual hallucinations meaning people on meth can see and hear things that are not really there. 

She would go on meth binges. She would use meth, stay awake for days, and then sleep for days. That cycle makes it difficult to remember. She was in this type of meth cycle when she spoke to the police. She agreed she might have been mistaken about what Daher told her. She knew a little about the case from media and discussions on the street. 

She agreed with the suggestion that she heard all of the information about this case from other people but she never mentioned who those people were. She was told Ahmed was hit in the head with the toilet tank lid and it was other people who told her that. 

She agreed that she never heard Daher and Brightnose-Baker talking about killing Ahmed prior to the death of Ahmed. She never heard Daher say he wanted to beat up Ahmed. She denied that Daher would tell stories about how tough he is or that he is a superhero. She never heard Daher claim he killed the guy who assaulted his sisters. 

She agreed that Daher never told her he killed Ahmed and that it was a mistake when she told the police Daher told her he killed Ahmed. 

Counsel for Brightnose-Baker questioned Osborne about her relationship with Brightnose-Baker. She began a relationship with him when she was young and in a foster home. She knew Brightnose-Baker also had experience in foster care. At times, she would leave her group home and she would be reported as a missing person. She knew the same thing happened with Brightnose-Baker. She believes he had a support worker through FASD Justice. 

She stated that Brightnose-Baker was a follower.
 He was taken advantage of because he was a quiet, shy, vulnerable guy. She agreed that she and Brightnose-Baker moved around a lot in 2020 until April 2021. They spent a lot of time with her sister Desiree. 

Osborne was a heavy drug user at the time of this incident. She would use drugs at various locations with various other users and had many conversations. She agrees that she is unable to say who told her what information and exactly what they said. 

Osborne told the police many things but she cannot say today if it was the truth. She does not know if it is true that Ahmed was dragged into the bathroom. She cannot say today where she got that information. 

She is unable to say today why she told the police that Brightnose-Baker was washing blood out of his jeans. She does not know if it is true. The drug use would affect her memory. 

She agrees that the drug lifestyle in Winnipeg is a dangerous lifestyle. She has witnessed violence. Heavy drug use makes it difficult, if not impossible, to keep track of days and time. 

She used meth and “down”. She describes “down” as fentanyl or heroin. She agreed Brightnose-Baker was a regular user of meth and “down”. 

She was asked about her video statement to the police. She was unable to say what information the police told her. She felt uncomfortable and intimidated with the police. She agreed she is unable to say today where she got the information she told the police. 

She would attend a vacant suite at 626 Ellice to do drugs. She did not recall being arrested on her 18th birthday and charged for being unlawfully in 626 Ellice but did agree she would have been dropped off at her sister’s place at 2-320 Toronto Street. 

Osborne admits her criminal record and that she was arrested on September 3, 2022, for firearm offences. At that time, she gave a false name saying she was Cassidy Swampy. She was released on conditions. She was recently arrested on November 17, 2022, for breaches and that is why she is in custody. 
Theresa Derendorf

Derendorf started using meth in 2019. She was an addict using meth all day every day. Prior to that, she was in a family relationship. She and her husband have four children. They owned three successful businesses and she led a charmed life. In 2017, she separated from her husband and her life spiralled into the drug scene. She has a criminal record from September 14, 2022. She was convicted for possession of a controlled substance for the purpose of trafficking and possession of property obtained by crime. After serving the equivalent of 174 days in pre-trial custody, she was sentenced to a five-month conditional sentence order and 12 months of probation. The last time she used meth was the day she was taken into custody on March 24, 2022. 

Derendorf told me about her relationship with Desiree Thomas, Daher, Osborne and Brightnose-Baker. In October 2020, Derendorf was living in a basement suite on Austin. Desiree moved into her residence around the end of October 2020 and Daher moved in shortly after at the beginning of November 2020. 

Desiree was a very close friend from the drug scene. Derendorf knew Desiree’s children and knew Daher as the father to the boy and girl. Daher lived in her suite from November until December 28, 2020. The December 28th day stands out for Derendorf as that is the day she was arrested and she claims Daher’s friends raped her. 

She knows Daher and describes him as 6 foot 1 inch Caucasian male with blue eyes and a shaved head. She confirmed Daher had access to a sawed-off shotgun with a black bandana wrapped around the handle part. She described seeing the shotgun shells for the gun. It was a big gun but it was cut down. 

Derendorf knew Osborne and knew she was dating Brightnose-Baker. She said Osborne and Brightnose-Baker would attend the Austin residence several times per week. She recalls Brightnose-Baker was born in 1999 as that is the year she met her husband. 

Derendorf knew a man named Danny Delang from the drug scene. That is how she met Ahmed as Ahmed and Delang were in a relationship. She described Ahmed as very thin. She learned Ahmed had been killed since she and Delang had a conversation about Ahmed’s death while she was in her residence on Austin with Desiree and Daher. They were all within earshot sitting in the living room. The conversation was on speakerphone as Desiree and Daher both knew Delang. At the time of the conversation, she believed Colin Leiterman had been charged with Ahmed’s death and she believed Ahmed had been killed at the river. 

While the conversation was going on, Daher got up and started pacing. Shortly after the conversation, within an hour, Daher started talking about times in his life he had to protect women from bad men. There was further conversation about Leiterman in custody. Daher wanted to obtain Leiterman’s inmate number to drop off money and mentioned Leiterman was staying solid or he was scared. 

There was further conversation about Ahmed within the next 24 hours. Derendorf explained Daher had mentioned he had run-ins with Ahmed previously that were not good. Daher said a group of black guys including Ahmed had chased Daher in a back alley in the West End of Winnipeg. 

Daher described another incident where he and Brightnose-Baker saw Ahmed and they took his bike and beat him up. Daher told her Ahmed went to the police and the police arrested both of them at 505 Victor. They let Daher go but held Brightnose-Baker because he was a missing person. She was told that Brightnose-Baker was shown a picture of Ahmed by the police and it said he was a pedophile. She explained they called him a “skinner”.

Tommy Bignal lived at 505 Victor. He is Daher’s best friend and is the guy who raped Derendorf. 

Later on, Daher told her about Ahmed’s death. He told her he killed Ahmed as the police had given the green light on Ahmed because Ahmed was a skinner. He told her he had numerous run-ins with this skinner and it was destiny. He wanted to take out Ahmed, so he did. Daher told her it was at a house off Pembina Highway and she knew of the house. She confirmed the house she was speaking of was in the photobook, Exhibit No. 4. 

Daher told her the gruesome details. He said he took Ahmed into bathroom, tied him up and tortured him for days. He said Ahmed would not die. He was begging for his life and crying for his mother. He had a strong will to live. Daher told her it happened in the bathroom. She had previously assumed Ahmed died at the river. She never heard he had been tied up. Daher was the one who said he was tied up. Daher said that Ahmed was wounded by a faucet embedded in his face. Daher said Ahmed’s entire face was beaten and broken. He said he stabbed Ahmed. She said Daher was proud that he took out this skinner. He believed he was doing the right thing. She said Daher told her his brother Brightnose-Baker was there. Daher told her other people were in the house including a guy named James, Leiterman, a girl and Jay Borden. 

Daher was not concerned about Leiterman as he was solid but worried the others ratted him out and he would kill the witnesses. He had a kill sheet and said, “no face no case”. 

Derendorf recalled a conversation she had with Brightnose-Baker at the Austin residence some time after her conversations with Daher. The conversation stands out because Desiree’s other sister named Gina had overdosed in the living room at Austin. Gina was using “down”, which is fentanyl. She looked dead. An ambulance attended to care for Gina. The paramedics revived her. She refused to go with them because she just got out of jail and wanted to get high. The paramedics cautioned her that her tolerance was diminished because she had not been using while in custody and she should use less drugs. The paramedics were about to leave when Osborne and Brightnose-Baker arrived. 

Gina did not realize she had overdosed but everyone else was shook up because she was essentially dead. The conversation was serious and Brightnose-Baker was very emotional. Brightnose-Baker said he hated being addicted to “down” and he wanted Osborne and himself out of the drug lifestyle. He explained he was going to church several times per week to shake off his involvement in the death of Ahmed. 

Brightnose-Baker admitted he was present when Ahmed was beaten and he was afraid of Daher so he gave Ahmed a few punches to seem like he was taking part in it. Brightnose-Baker said Ahmed wanted to live. He wished Ahmed would just die to be out of the misery and horror that he was suffering. He explained Ahmed was crying for his family and begging and begging but to no end. 

Derendorf had this information but did not go to the police. She explained she was not there and there were other people to say what happened. She was concerned and afraid about speaking to the police. She said there was a plan to call the police to come to the apartment so the police could find Daher and arrest him if there were warrants. She was too afraid to follow through and never called the police. 
 
On December 28, 2020, Derendorf was arrested and then released by the police. The police dropped her off at her residence on Austin. Daher and his friends believed she went to the police and ratted out Daher. She was beaten and raped when she returned to her residence. She knew she needed to leave the city and the province. Desiree’s sister Gina said she had a car that she could sell cheap. 
 
On January 12, 2021, she went with Gina to her place on Mountain. They went to the apartment. Gina opened the door and Daher was on the couch with Desiree. Daher ran at her, pulled out a gun and put it to her face. He pulled the trigger while she put her hand up and pulled the trigger again. He was punching her, calling her a “rat” and trying to pull her into the suite. Blood was squirting out of her face. She could see the bathroom and tub in the suite and immediately believed he was going to drag her into it and kill her. Desiree and Gina were screaming, she was fighting for her life, broke free from Daher and went to the hospital. She described the weapon as a handgun and later learned it was a pellet gun. She has pellet fragments in the area of her right eye. She continues to suffer vision problems. The doctors removed the pellet from her hand. 
 
She believes that Daher and his friends think she ratted him out because she was arrested and then dropped off by the police on December 28, 2020. The only thing she knew about Daher to explain his violent behaviour was his involvement in the death of Ahmed. Dernedorf made it clear she did not rat him out. She had been arrested and charged for her own offences. 
 
She spoke to the police on January 19, 2021. She gave a statement and also reviewed photo lineups identifying Daher and Brightnose-Baker. In her separate discussions with Daher and Brightnose-Baker, they never ever mentioned anyone else being involved in killing Ahmed. 
 
Counsel for Daher cross-examined Derendorf at length about being shot by a pellet gun and the injuries she sustained. Counsel also took her through the circumstances of the assault and rape by four men. Counsel suggests she has a personal grudge against Daher for the pellet gun incident. 
 
Derendorf explained she is a Christian woman. She did not come to testify to hurt Daher. She feels bad for him. She feels hurt and disappointed because she believed they were friends and she believed he would protect her and Desiree. 
 
She agreed that there are ongoing medical consequences for her. She cannot have a MRI because pellet fragments in her orbital bone. She told me the scariest thing was the rape that she went through. She blames Daher for the rape. Tommy Bignal was not her drug dealer.
 She had met him a couple of times through Daher. There were four guys who beat and raped her and they were saying she ratted out Daher. 
 
She wishes Daher had never told her what he did to Ahmed because then there would have been no reason to attack her. She takes PTSD medication as a result of the assault and rape. She went on to describe the pain and anguish she continues to suffer. It is absolutely clear that she was traumatized and is telling the truth about the rape and pellet gun incident. 
 
Counsel suggested again that she had motive to lie and exaggerated her discussions with Daher. She disagreed with the suggestions. 
It was suggested that Daher always said he had heard Ahmed was killed in a bathtub. She strongly disagreed and is certain that Daher said he killed Ahmed in the bathtub. 
 
Derendorf has tried to put the drug lifestyle behind her. She had to leave those friends behind. She has moved out of province to get away from the lifestyle.
 
Counsel suggested Derendorf knew Daher was an abusive boyfriend. She agreed and she wanted to protect Desiree. She got to know Daher when he moved into her residence on Austin and shared some of his background. He claimed he had killed before. He explained some guy attacked his sisters and he killed the guy. She believes the guy was some uncle. She agreed that could have been made up. It was suggested he said he killed other people. She only knows of him killing the guy who attacked his sisters and the killing of Ahmed. 
 
It was suggested that he portrayed himself as a hero or superhero and she agreed that is how Daher described himself. She hopes he was exaggerating his behaviour. She also knows he is capable of doing serious violence because of what he did to her. 
 
Derendorf explains that the drug lifestyle is dangerous and there is a need to seem tough or violent to protect yourself. Daher was part of the drug scene and was a meth user. She made it clear that Daher did more than talk about violence, as he was violent towards her so it was not just talk and exaggerations. 
 
She was questioned about what Daher told her about stabbing Ahmed. It was suggested to her that Daher said he stabbed Ahmed in the foot. Derendorf explained it was the foot or hand. He said he could not do anything more to the face. There was nothing left to do to his face. He was stabbing him all over and had to stab in the foot or hand. She believes he used the word stab not the word slice. 
 
Derendorf was asked by counsel if Daher told her he hired Jay Borden to dispose of Ahmed. Derendorf gave a detailed account of what Daher told her. She said Borden went into the house and opened the bathroom door and saw Ahmed and quickly closed the door stating he saw nothing.
 Daher told Borden he did see something and Daher told Borden and Leiterman to dispose of Ahmed and they dumped him in the river. 
 
Counsel suggested Daher told her Borden picked up Daher that night. She disagreed. Daher never told her how he got to the house. Daher told Derendorf that Tanya (known as TK) was at the house and told her that Ahmed was there. 
 
Derendorf explained it was Brightnose-Baker that said Borden drove him there. She explained that Brightnose-Baker’s explanation about what happened had nothing to do with Ahmed being a “skinner”. The murder had to do with “down” and it was about drug money owed to Daher. 
 
Counsel had Derendorf confirm Daher told her the police disclosed information that Ahmed was a pedophile. She was unsure if it was Daher or Brightnose-Baker that had the information from the police but she was certain Daher told her about it. 
 
Her connection to Ahmed was through Danny Delang. She was surprised to hear Ahmed was selling drugs. She knew he was a meth user but she did not believe him to be someone selling drugs. 
 
She confirmed Osborne and Brightnose-Baker came to her Austin street residence three times a week and they used “down”. She felt Brightnose-Baker was a victim as well. 
 
Evan Brightnose-Baker
 
Brightnose-Baker was arrested on April 27, 2021. He gave a lengthy video statement that is marked Exhibit No. 1 in the trial. The statement from Brightnose-Baker can only be used against him; it cannot be used against Daher. I will briefly summarize the relevant portions. 
 
He confirmed that there was an incident on Victor Street prior to the death of Ahmed. It was at Tanya’s place. Tanya is known as TK. Brightnose-Baker said Ahmed took TK’s money. There was a fight, the police were called and he was interviewed by the police. 
 
He admits he was at Royce and involved in assaulting Ahmed. He stated, “I did it man, I did it, I fucked up”. 
 
Brightnose-Baker said he was brought along and not even told what was going to happen. He was sober that night and was only told they were going to do a job. Once they were closer to the residence, he was told about the job. He said the assault was over money and they were going to “tax” Ahmed, which meant they were going to take his stuff. He stated, “I just thought he was going to rob him”.
 
He said they went in and Ahmed was in the kitchen area. He was forced into the washroom. Ahmed was bleeding from the head and nose. He said Ahmed was struck with a collapsible baton in the living room but he denies it was he who had the baton. He told the police Leiterman struck Ahmed with the baton. 
 
Ahmed was tied up with zip ties and clothes. He was scared and begging to be let go. Brightnose-Baker described Ahmed fighting for his life. Ahmed got free and out of the tub only to be assaulted some more. Ahmed was on the floor in the bathroom between the tub and toilet and Brightnose-Baker was jumping on him. Ahmed was asked for money and emptied his pockets but he had no money. He was tied up and put back in the tub. Brightnose-Baker described using ratchet straps to restrain him. 
 
The police question him about cling wrap being used to wrap around Ahmed’s hands. He denies ever touching the cling wrap. He was told his fingerprints were located on the cling wrap in a kitchen drawer. He agrees he may have passed it to someone. 
 
Brightnose-Baker goes on to say others showed up in a truck. Some unknown male with a sword stabbed Ahmed. Brightnose-Baker claims he left the residence alone. Ahmed was still alive and he never meant for him to die. 
 
He goes on to say he cleaned up the washroom before he left. He used a cloth and a mop to clean up blood in the washroom and kitchen area. He agrees that there was probably blood on his shoes and the shoes are gone. Brightnose-Baker said he cleaned up the place for an hour. 
Media Releases
 
During this investigation, the WPS authorized a number of media releases. The first was on October 12, 2020. The media report disclosed that the WPS found a body in the river. The next day, the WPS sent out an updated media report. That report included information that the body recovered from the river was the 29-year-old victim Ahmed.
 
Exhibit No. 13 is the media release from January 19, 2021, which advises the public that the police have a warrant for the arrest of Daher. The report gives a physical description of Daher and includes his photograph.
 
Exhibit No. 14 is the media release from February 10, 2021. The WPS is asking for information from the public to locate Daher and Brightnose-Baker. There are physical descriptions and photographs of both suspects in the media release. 
 
On February 28, 2021, there was another media release seeking assistance to locate Brightnose-Baker and it includes the same photograph of the suspect. There was a final media release about Brightnose-Baker on April 28, 2021, indicating that he was in police custody. 
Social Media and video from the taxi
 
The police were able to obtain social media images of Daher from his Facebook account that are in evidence. Exhibit No. 26 is the Facebook profile for Daher that contains the statement, “I don’t like being the bad guy, I love being the bad guy”. Within the image are the words “no face no case”. 
 
Exhibit No. 27 appears to be a selfie of Daher posing outside beside some buildings. He is wearing a hat with a peak. Although the photograph is unclear, I can see a checkerboard pattern on the underside of the peak of the hat.
 
Exhibit No. 28 is another selfie of Daher taken inside in front of a mirror. He is wearing a black toque and white t-shirt. This photo reveals his physical stature. 
 
Exhibit No. 29 is an image with three individuals.
 Daher is in the centre. He has a shaved head. Brightnose-Baker is on the right of the page. 
 
Exhibit No.30 is another image of Daher. It appears to be a mirror image. His toque has the word POLO on it and it appears backwards. He is wearing a black mask that covers up to the bridge of his nose. 
 
Exhibit No. 31 is another image of Daher. It is taken outside. It is a head shot. He is wearing a mask and covering. He is also wearing a hat with a checkerboard pattern on the underside of the peak. 
 
The police were also able to obtain video evidence from a Duffy’s taxi that attended to Royce on October 10, 2020, at 12:50 a.m. The video consists of three clips and is marked Exhibit No. 20. 
 
The video captures the taxi picking up a sole occupant. The first clip has the front view that captures an individual outside passing in front of the taxi. The person appears to be tall and thin with something on their back. The camera also captures a black truck and white car in the driveway near the house.
 
 The second clip is the rear view and it captures the individual getting in the rear passenger seat. It also captures the driver of the taxi. The video camera distorts the lighting so it is difficult to make out colours. In both clips, you can hear the discussion about where the individual wishes to go. It is clear the person does not personally know the location as it is an address at 2339 Pembina Highway and the person is suggesting the street is Dartmouth. The person provides the driver with a sheet of paper with the address using their left hand. There is no glove on the hand. The taxi driver is explaining the address is 2339 Pembina and 30 is the unit number and Dartmouth must be the person.
 
The driver hands the paper back to the person. Throughout this clip, I am able to tell the individual is wearing a backpack. The person has a balaclava type mask covering their face. The individual is wearing a hat on their head facing backwards so the peak is at the rear. I am able to see a checkerboard pattern on the peak of the hat. 
 
The final clip captures the taxi arriving at the destination. There is a discussion pertaining to the fare and the person in the back is indicating $10 is all that the driver needs to give him back as change. The driver hands the money back and I can see the person is wearing a glove on their hand. 
 
I have carefully reviewed the video clips numerous times. I conclude the passenger is a tall thin male with a build similar to Daher. The voice is that of a male. The passenger is wearing a hat with a peak. The peak has a checkerboard pattern similar to the pattern seen on the hats worn by Daher in the Facebook images found in Exhibits Nos. 27 and 31. The person is wearing a balaclava or mask that is similar to the mask worn by Daher in Exhibit No. 30. 
 
 It is an agreed fact that the family of the deceased moved out of unit 30-2339 Pembina Highway on September 3, 2020. The deceased, Ahmed, was the sole occupant of the residence after September 3, 2020. The passenger in the taxi had the home address for Ahmed but it is clear from the discussion in the taxi that he had never been there in the past. As I will explain, the totality of the evidence proves beyond a reasonable doubt the passenger in the taxi is Daher and he was driven to Ahmed’s residence. 
Autopsy
 
On October 13, 2020, Dr. Littman conducted the autopsy on Ahmed. He found multiple blunt trauma to the head with associated skull fractures and acute brain trauma. There was non-lethal sharp force injuries to the head, trunk and limbs. There was also blunt force injuries to the trunk and upper limbs. 
 
The autopsy report is Exhibit No. 33 and it details the incredible number of injuries inflicted on Ahmed. There were gaping lacerations to the skull that were associated to comminuted skull fractures. This means the bone has broken into a number of pieces. 
 
Significant force would have been required to inflict these types of injuries. The type of force required would be similar to swinging a baseball bat to the skull. Dr. Littman opined the head wounds and skull fractures were caused by at least three or four blows and up to 10 or more. The wounds were caused by a blunt object. Dr. Littman agreed that a number of different objects could have caused the injuries including a toilet tank lid. 
 
Dr. Littman went on to describe many sharp force injuries. There were stab wounds to the back and the thighs of the body. There were many lacerations caused by sharp force injures throughout the body. Some to the head, some to the arms and legs. He noted there was bleeding associated with the sharp force injuries that indicate the heart was still beating and Ahmed was alive when the injuries were inflicted. The sheer number of injuries suggest this was a prolonged attack. 
Legal Principles.
 
In the Criminal Justice System, there are a number of foundational principles worth repeating: •

 
First, the accused comes to court cloaked with the presumption of innocence. •

 
Second, the onus is on the Crown to prove the case. •

 
Third, the standard of proof is substantial, as the Crown must prove the charge beyond a reasonable doubt. •

 
Forth, the accused need not say anything and need not prove anything as he has the constitutional right to remain silent. In this case, Daher exercised his right to remain silent and did not call any evidence in the trial. •

 
Brightnose-Baker did not testify but his video statement to the police from 
April 27, 2021, is in evidence. In assessing his statement, I am guided by the test set out by the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. W.(D.), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC). 
•

 
I note that a trier of fact is entitled to accept some, all or none of the evidence of witnesses that testify in a trial.
 
The requisite intent for murder is set out in section 229 of the Criminal Code: Murder 
s. 229 Culpable homicide is murder
(a) where the person who causes the death of a human being
(i) means to cause his death, or
(ii) means to cause him bodily harm that he knows is likely to cause his death, and is reckless whether death ensues or not; Analysis
 
This was a targeted attack on Ahmed. He was assaulted in the living room at1046 Royce. He was forced into the bathroom where he was restrained, beaten, tortured and killed. The totality of the evidence proves beyond a reasonable doubt that Daher and Brightnose-Baker together killed Mohamed Ahmed. 
 
Daher argues the evidence falls short of proving his identification beyond a reasonable doubt. I disagree. I accept the evidence of Theresa Derendorf. It was refreshing to have a witness attend court and testify in a completely open and honest manner. Daher submits she has motive to lie and did lie because of his violent assault on her. I flatly reject that submission. 
 
I carefully observed and listened to Derendorf, she is a truthful and reliable witness. I acknowledge she was a heavy meth user at the time and has a criminal record. She came to the drug lifestyle later in life. It is clear that she is an intelligent and thoughtful person. She understands better than anyone the dangers associated with cooperating with the criminal justice system. She denies that she is seeking revenge against Daher by testifying and I believe her. 
 
She testified about what she knew and where she obtained the information. The information came from Daher and Brightnose-Baker. The only other information she had about the death of Ahmed came from Danny Delang and the first media report. She believed Ahmed was shot and killed at the river. It was only after separate discussions with the co-accused that she learned about what happened to Ahmed. 
 
Derendorf did not exaggerate or embellish her evidence. She was careful and measured with her responses. Her evidence was logical and fits with all of the other evidence presented in court. She was cross-examined at length by counsel for Daher. She was unmoved. She provided emotional but consistent evidence about Daher’s violent assault against her. The more she was questioned, the stronger her evidence. She provided details about her injuries both physical and emotional. She was unshaken on cross-examination. The most difficult witness to cross-examine is the witness who tells the truth. It is clear Derendorf was telling the truth.
 
I accept Daher told her he had previous run-ins with Ahmed including the incident on Victor. Daher told her that Ahmed was a “skinner”. Daher told her he tortured and killed Ahmed when he was in the tub and that Ahmed was begging for his life and his face was beaten and broken. He stabbed other parts of his body. That is consistent with the autopsy results, the scene photographs and DNA evidence that located blood of Ahmed in the washroom.
 
I accept Derendorf saw Daher with a sawed-off shotgun and ammunition when he stayed at her residence on Austin Street. I accept her evidence that Daher portrayed himself as a hero who protects women and children. He was bragging and proud for taking out Ahmed whom he said was a “skinner”. 
 
I find that Daher had all of this information and he said all of these things to Derendorf because he was the masked intruder brandishing the sawed-off shotgun. He assaulted, tortured and killed Ahmed. While torturing Ahmed, he learned information of his home address and I conclude the masked passenger in the taxi was Daher going to the victim’s residence. 
 
I accept Derendorf’s evidence about information she received from Brightnose-Baker. He told Derendorf he was present when Ahmed was beaten and he was afraid of Daher so he gave Ahmed a few punches to seem like he was taking part of it. Brightnose-Baker said Ahmed wanted to live. He told Derendorf he wished Ahmed would just die to be out of the misery and horror that he was suffering. He explained, Ahmed was crying for his family and begging for his life to no end. 
 
Daher and Brightnose-Baker never told Derendorf of any other person being involved in the death of Ahmed.
 
There is other evidence about the identification and involvement of Daher and Brightnose-Baker. It comes from the video statement of Osborne. I reject most of Osborne’s in-court testimony. She is deeply entrenched in the criminal drug lifestyle. She is aware of consequences for those that cooperate with a prosecution. It is hardly surprising that she would not want to testify in the presence of the co-accused. 
 
I acknowledge her video statement was taken six and a half months after the death of Ahmed. She has a criminal record and is a serious drug addict that can affect memory. However, I find her statement to the police on April 27, 2021, to be reliable. She explained her close relationship to Daher and Brightnose-Baker. She had no reason to lie and provide police with information to implicate the co-accused. 
 
She described the relationship between Brightnose-Baker and Daher. It is consistent with other evidence. The men were like brothers. Daher was older and Brightnose-Baker looked up to him. 
 
She told the police about a prior occasion where they beat up Ahmed. This is consistent with the police attending 505 Victor and it is consistent with the evidence from Derendorf on this point. 
 
Osborne recalled she and Brightnose-Baker were sleeping when Daher came in the room and told him to “get ready, let’s go”. She said it was unexpected. I accept that evidence, as it is consistent with what Brightnose-Baker told the police. He told the police he was brought along and not told why. He said he went to the residence with Daher. 
 
I accept Osborne’s evidence that Daher and Brightnose-Baker had access to a sawed-off shotgun. The evidence of Derendorf and Brightnose-Baker’s statement to the police supports her evidence on this point. Brightnose-Baker told the police Daher had a shotgun. I pause to note that I am only using Brightnose-Baker’s statement for the limited purpose of identifying markers of reliability regarding Osborne’s statement. I am not using his statement as evidence against Daher. 
 
 Osborne told the police Ahmed was dragged into the bathroom and beat up. This is consistent and supported by the evidence from Leiterman, Derendorf, Brightnose-Baker and the scene. 
 
Daher said, “we killed him, we killed Moe”. This is consistent with what Daher told Derendorf. Osborne said they were bragging about it. She said Daher was smiling and proud of killing Ahmed. This is consistent with what Daher told Derendorf. 
 
Osborne told the police Brightnose-Baker returned with blood on his clothes and shoes. She saw him wash his jeans in the tub and throw out his shoes. They told her there was blood everywhere and on the walls. They said the blood was hard to clean up. This evidence is consistent with the evidence from Leiterman, the DNA and the evidence from Brightnose-Baker to the police. He told the police he had blood on his shoes and he got rid of them. He told the police he took an hour clean up the residence. He denied washing his jeans in the tub. I do not believe him. He admits kicking and punching Ahmed in the tight confines of the bathroom. He said he had to wrestle him into the tub. Ahmed was bleeding all over. There was blood throughout the bathroom and up the walls. I conclude he had blood on his clothes. 
 
Osborne told the police that she believes Daher told her that he struck Ahmed with a toilet tank lid and that is what knocked him out. I accept this evidence. It is consistent with the opinion of Dr. Littman and the toilet tank lid was missing from the bathroom. 
 
Other evidence of identification of Daher comes from Martel and the taxi video. That evidence on its own is insufficient to prove it was Daher but it does add to the overall strength of the identification evidence. 
 
Brightnose-Baker argues he is only guilty of manslaughter.
 He admits he assaulted Ahmed but left the residence when Ahmed was alive. I do not believe him and his statement does not raise a reasonable doubt about the extent of his involvement in this horrific murder. The totality of the evidence proves beyond a reasonable doubt that he and Daher beat, tortured and killed Ahmed. 
 
Brightnose-Baker admits his brother told him they had a job to do. He was told they were going to “tax” Ahmed. Together, they went to 1046 Royce. I find Brightnose-Baker was armed with a collapsible baton. I suspect Ahmed recognized Brightnose-Baker from the incident on Victor and tried to leave. I accept the evidence from Martel. It was Brightnose-Baker who struck Ahmed with the baton while in the living room. He also struck Martel twice in the arm resulting in bruising to his hand that was still visible ten days later. 
 
I reject Brightnose-Baker’s evidence that it was Leiterman who had the baton and struck Ahmed. Leiterman was never questioned on this point. As I said, this was a targeted attack. Brightnose-Baker and Daher were involved in a dangerous lifestyle. Common sense suggests they were prepared and armed when going to do a job. 
 
I reject Brightnose-Baker’s story that other guys showed up with a sword and stabbed Ahmed. He never told that to Osborne or Derendorf because it did not happen. I find he is lying to the police on this point. 
 
Brightnose-Baker admits to forcing Ahmed into the bathroom where he was beaten, tied up, tortured and killed. Brightnose-Baker was there from the start to the end. He admits that he cleaned up blood with a cloth and a mop. He cleaned the residence for an hour. This was not his residence. There was only one reason for him to clean it up and that was to remove evidence. The length of time he was there, the injuries inflicted and the blood in the residence speaks to the condition of Ahmed and the intent of the accused. The totality of the evidence proves beyond a reasonable doubt Daher and Brightnose-Baker meant to cause his death and are guilty of second-degree murder. 
 
The totality of the evidence proves Daher was the masked intruder who brandished the sawed-off shotgun. On October 20, 2020, Martel told the police Daher pointed the sawed-off shotgun at him and told him to get out of the way. I acknowledge Martel backed away from that statement in his testimony. Again, that is not surprising given he was testifying in the presence of the co-accused. It was clear to me that Martel was afraid during his testimony. He does not want to be known as a rat since that is a dangerous label. 
 
I find Daher did point the sawed-off shotgun at Martel and told him to get out of the way. This was a targeted attack. Daher was after Ahmed. Martel was in the way. Ahmed knew he was in trouble and was fighting back against Brightnose-Baker. Daher was armed with a sawed-off shotgun. He pointed it at Martel to gain control and compliance. That type of weapon is possessed to intimidate and instill fear. It is favoured for its lethal nature and ease of concealment. It is often hidden in a pant leg, jacket or backpack. I note, Daher had a backpack when he left in the taxi. He still had a sawed-off shotgun after this incident when he moved in with Derendorf on Austin. 
 
Section 2 of the Criminal Code defines firearm as: … a barrelled weapon from which any shot, bullet or other projectile can be discharged and that is capable of causing serious bodily injury or death to a person, and includes any frame or receiver of such a barrelled weapon and anything that can be adapted for use as a firearm. 
 
A sawed-off shotgun meets the definition of firearm.
 
 The totality of the evidence proves beyond a reasonable doubt that Daher pointed the sawed-off shotgun at Martel on October 10, 2020, and I convict him of count two on the Indictment. 
IV.

 
Conclusion
 
Jesse James Daher and Evan Brightnose-Baker are guilty of second-degree murder for killing Mohamed Ahmed. Jesse James Daher is guilty of pointing a firearm at Jared Martel. 
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/mb/kb/2023mbkb6.html
 
 
The two co-accused were charged with possession of over a million dollars worth of fentanyl and Methylenedioxyamphetamine (“MDA”) for the purposes of trafficking. When their rented van was pulled over on the highway, on July 28, 2020, Mr. Mandeep Deol (“Deol”) was the driver and Mr. Babaljit Singh (“Singh”) was the passenger. 
(Unless indicated otherwise, all dates are in 2020.) 
 
 
The drugs were in two big hockey bags in the rear section of the van. Deol had rented the van in Toronto on Thursday, July 23. The van drove almost around-the-clock to Vancouver and then almost immediately turned around and headed back quickly to Toronto. Deol chose not to testify. Singh testified that he had no knowledge that there were any illegal drugs in the van. 
 
 
The Crown’s expert witness testified about typical behaviour for drug couriers in Canada. In some ways, the behaviour of the co-accused was typical, and in some ways it was atypical.
 
 
For the reasons explained below, I find Deol guilty as charged, and I find Singh not guilty. FACTS
 
 
This is not a comprehensive recitation of all evidence and argument tendered; it is a concise summary of certain important matters.

 
 
At the trial, the parties agreed on a number of facts.
 
 
After a voir dire, in a preliminary decision (2022 MBQB 24), I ruled that the drugs were admissible. In the voir dire, the arresting police officer testified that he witnessed the van speeding. It was going east on the Trans Canada Highway. 
When the officer pulled the van over, there was an open bottle of whiskey in plain view in the back seat. The passenger had no valid driver’s licence. The drugs (about 50 kg of MDA and about 26 kg of fentanyl) were found in two large hockey bags in the rear section of the van. There was one small bag of MDA under one of the hockey bags. Otherwise, all the drugs were in the two hockey bags.
 
 
At the trial, the Crown called expert evidence about Canadian drug trafficking and Canadian drug couriers in general. It is common for couriers to work in pairs, and it is common to use rented vehicles. It is common for drugs to be picked up in the Vancouver area and to be driven to other Canadian locations. It is common for drug syndicates to choose couriers who will not call undue attention to themselves. It is common for couriers to move drugs as fast as possible (e.g. by having two drivers take turns driving, so that the vehicle does not have to stop except for gas and incidentals). It is unlikely that a courier would be a non-Canadian without a valid Visa. It is preferable that couriers speak English and/or French.
 
 
The Crown’s evidence against both co-accused was circumstantial in nature. 

The van rental contract showed that Deol rented the van in Toronto on Thursday, July 23, and was supposed to return it to Toronto on Wednesday, July 29.

Gas receipts found in the van showed that it travelled from Toronto to Vancouver and then back towards Toronto. As noted, it was pulled over heading eastbound on the Trans Canada Highway near Brandon, on July 28. It was speeding and there was open liquor in plain view in the back seat. At trial, Singh said it was his liquor. Almost all of the gas receipts showed cash payments. 

In their agreed facts, using the gas receipts and Google maps, the parties constructed an approximate schedule of the van’s movements. The van drove from Toronto to Vancouver in about 45.95 hours, then drove from Vancouver to Brandon in about 21.25 hours. 

When the van was pulled over, Deol had a valid driver’s licence on his person, but Singh did not. The arresting officer said that both men appeared nervous.

The fentanyl seized was worth roughly one million dollars or more. The MDA seized was worth roughly half a million dollars.

Deol’s smart phone was seized. It showed that Deol had sent text messages to one or more persons during the trip in question. None of the messages explicitly mentioned illegal drugs or used code words that obviously suggested drugs. Some messages mentioned money. Some messages showed the progress of the van during its trip. One message instructed Deol to meet a person named “Happy” at a location in Burnaby on July 26 at 2:00 p.m.

When arrested, Deol had $200 in his wallet.

Singh testified at trial. He has a Grade 10 education and his English is poor. He was born in India and lived in Italy before coming to Canada. He lived in the Toronto area for about two years and never travelled outside of the Toronto area. He did not know how far Vancouver was from Toronto. Deol was his cousin. Deol had never lied to him.

Singh worked Monday through Thursday. His job was important to him.

Deol asked Singh if he wanted to go with him (Deol) on a drive to Vancouver. Deol would pay for gas and food. Deol said something about asking someone in Vancouver about a job. 
Deol told Singh the trip would take 3-4 days. Singh agreed to go.

Deol picked Singh up on July 23. Singh had to work on July 27. He thought Deol would get him back to Toronto for July 27.

Singh’s Canadian Visa expired before July 2020. When the co-accused were pulled over by the police, Singh said he was nervous because of his expired Visa.

During the trip, Deol always paid for gas. When they stopped at gas stations, Singh went into the stations to buy food and/or use the washroom.

They sometimes stopped at fast food restaurants and went into the restaurants to eat (rather than using drive-throughs). Singh sometimes napped in the van. Deol sometimes stopped the van and napped for about an hour. 

They never stayed in hotels. Singh assumed that was in order to save money.

Singh was concerned about time and sometimes asked Deol when they would get to Vancouver. Deol would answer “another two hours” or “another four hours”. He was inaccurate.

In Vancouver, Deol left Singh at a gas station and said he would park the van. Deol left and came back after about 10-15 minutes. He said it took some time to find parking. Then the two walked to the van and got into it.

Deol told Singh that he had talked to his Vancouver contact on the phone and that they could now return to Toronto. They did no sightseeing.

By the morning of July 27, Singh realized that he would have to miss some work. He phoned his boss to tell him.

Singh said he never knew that there were drugs in the van. He never looked in the rearmost area where the hockey bags were. He never suspected Deol of doing anything illegal. ARGUMENT

The Crown argued that the circumstantial evidence was enough to prove both accused guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. At the very least, both co-accused were willfully blind. 
When the van was pulled over, both co-accused and the drugs were in the van. 
Deol was the driver and the van was rented in his name.

In some ways, the van and the trip fit the typical pattern of a drug courier trip, as outlined by the Crown’s expert witness. The van was rented. The van travelled to and from Vancouver. The trip was rapid, with no nights spent in hotels, or other long pauses.

The Crown submitted that Singh was not at all credible. The story he told was very odd in many ways. The trip was obviously not a typical pleasure or sightseeing trip. Yet, according to his evidence, Singh asked Deol no probing questions at all about the odd nature of the trip. When Deol began asking how much longer it would take to reach Vancouver, and Deol kept providing inaccurate answers, Singh (if he can be believed) asked no probing questions. 

If Singh can be believed, when Deol said he talked to his Vancouver contact person by telephone and they could now go back to Toronto, Singh again asked no probing questions. That too, is odd. It is possible to phone Vancouver from Toronto without having to drive all the way there.

The Crown submitted that either Singh had actual knowledge of the drugs, or he was willfully blind as to their existence. In the alternative, Singh was a party to the offence under section 21 of the Criminal Code.

Both defence counsel argued that some aspects of the trip did not fit the typical pattern outlined by the Crown’s expert witness. The only evidence before the court was that Singh never drove. This does not fit the “two-drivers” pattern. The van did not obey all traffic laws (it was speeding and open liquor was visible in the van.) Singh spoke little English and had an expired Visa. 

Both counsel pointed out that the Crown had no DNA or fingerprint evidence. There was no evidence that either Deol or Singh were carrying large amounts of cash.

Singh’s counsel pointed that Singh had a Grade 10 education and poor English. Deol was his cousin, and Singh said Deol had never lied to him. Singh testified that Deol was alone with the van for a period of time in Vancouver. Using the Villaroman analysis (see paragraph 44), a plausible theory was that Deol knew about the drugs, but Singh did not.

No one disputed that the huge quantity of illegal drugs was sufficient to make the offence possession for the purposes of trafficking, rather than simple possession. CRIMINAL CODE 
 
Section 21 of the Criminal Code, RSC 1985, c C-46 (the Code) says: Parties to offence 21 (1) Every one is a party to an offence who

 (a) actually commits it;

 (b) does or omits to do anything for the purpose of aiding any person 




 



 to commit it; or

 (c) abets any person in committing it.
 
Common intention (2) Where two or more persons form an intention in common to carry out an unlawful purpose and to assist each other therein and any one of them, in carrying out the common purpose, commits an offence, each of them who knew or ought to have known that the commission of the offence would be a probable consequence of carrying out the common purpose is a party to that offence.
 
Controlled Drugs and Substances Act 

Section 5 of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, SC 1996, c. 19 (the CDSA) says: Trafficking in substance 5 (1) No person shall traffic in a substance included in Schedule I, II, III, IV or V or in any substance represented or held out by that person to be such a substance.
 
Possession for purpose of trafficking (2) No person shall, for the purpose of trafficking, possess a substance included in Schedule I, II, III, IV or V.
 
CASE LAW

R. v. W.(D.), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), 1 SCR 742 [“W.(D.)”] was a sexual assault trial in which the accused testified. The court outlined a useful approach for analyzing the credibility of an accused and the principle of reasonable doubt. At page 758, the majority set out the framework for instructing a jury: First, if you believe the evidence of the accused, obviously you must acquit.
 
Second, if you do not believe the testimony of the accused but you are left in reasonable doubt by it, you must acquit.
 
Third, even if you are not left in doubt by the evidence of the accused, you must ask yourself whether, on the basis of the evidence which you do accept, you are convinced beyond a reasonable doubt by that evidence of the guilt of the accused.
 

Later cases have elaborated upon W.(D). 
R. v. Menow, 2013 MBCA 72 was also a sexual assault case involving a W.(D.) analysis. At the appeal stage, the accused argued that the trial judge had erred by considering the evidence of the complainant and of a witness in concluding that the accused was not credible. At paragraph 23, the appeal court observed: … To assess the evidence of the accused in a vacuum ignores the fact that the whole purpose of the trial is to determine whether or not he accused is guilty…It is impossible for an accused’s evidence to be considered without a factual or contextual backdrop for the charge itself. …
 

In R. v. Vuradin, 2013 SCC 38 (CanLII), 2 SCR 639, the court considered the W.(D.) framework. At paragraph 21, the court pointed out: 
… The order in which a trial judge makes credibility findings of witnesses is inconsequential as long as the principle of reasonable doubt remains the central consideration. …
 

In R v Villaroman, 2016 SCC 33 (“Villaroman”), the court explained the modern principles for analyzing circumstantial evidence. At paragraph 35, the court observed: … The issue with respect to circumstantial evidence is the range of reasonable inferences that can be drawn from it. If there are reasonable inferences other than guilt, the Crown’s evidence does not meet the standard of proof beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
 
At paragraph 37, the court added: … When assessing circumstantial evidence, the trier of fact should consider “other plausible theor[ies]” and “other reasonable possibilities” which are inconsistent with guilt…the Crown may need to negative these reasonable possibilities, but certainly does not need to “negative every possible conjecture, no matter how irrational or fanciful, which might be consistent with the innocence of the accused.” …
 
 
At paragraph 38, the court further added: Of course, the line between a “plausible theory” and “speculation” is not always easy to draw. But the basic question is whether the circumstantial evidence, viewed logically and in light of human experience, is reasonably capable of supporting an inference other than that the accused is guilty.
 

At paragraphs 20-27, R v Johnston, 2021 MBQB 144, included a concise summary of Villaroman and other case law on circumstantial evidence. At paragraph 23, the court quoted with approval from Dunlop and Sylvester v. The Queen, 1979 CanLII 20 (SCC), 2 SCR 881 (“Dunlop”). In Dunlop, at page 898, the majority observed: Mere presence at the scene of the crime is not sufficient to ground culpability. Something more is needed: encouragement of the principal offender; an act which facilitates the commission of the offence, such as keeping watch or enticing the victim away, or an act which tends to prevent or hinder interference with accomplishment of the criminal act, such as preventing the intended victim from escaping or being ready to assist the prime culprit.
 

In Dunlop, at page 898, the majority added: “A person is not guilty merely because he is present at the scene of a crime and does nothing to prevent it…”

R. v. Lola, 2020 SKCA 103, was a case involving cocaine trafficking and circumstantial evidence. The accused was found driving a vehicle with no passengers. A large quantity of cocaine was found in the vehicle, hidden in a console, and the accused had access to the drugs. There was other circumstantial evidence against the accused. The accused was not the registered owner of the vehicle. There was evidence that the owner and the accused knew each other. The accused did not testify, but did argue that it was possible that the owner put the drugs in the vehicle and the accused did not know about the drugs. The accused was convicted. At paragraph 47, the appeal court observed: Although it was impossible to exclude entirely Mr. Lola’s alternative suspect theory, that fact did not make the theory plausible or reasonable. In light of the circumstantial evidence before him, the trial judge dismissed Ms. Moon’s or any other person’s involvement as speculative. 
It was open for him to draw that line between speculation and plausible theory and reasonable possibility.
 

R. v. Oddleifson (J.N.), 2010 MBCA 44, leave denied at 2010 CanLII 62503 (SCC) (“Oddleifson”), dealt with circumstantial evidence. There was strong circumstantial evidence that the accused possessed illegal drugs, and the accused was ultimately convicted. At paragraph 26, the court explained that the Crown’s case “cried out for an explanation”. The accused chose not to testify, which was his right. However, his choice, “carried the risk of not providing the trial judge with the necessary evidentiary foundation which, if accepted, could have precluded the inference of [drug] possession from being drawn.”

In R. v. Terrence, 1983 CanLII 51 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 357 (“Terrence”), at page 364, the court observed that, “a constituent and essential element of possession under s. 3(4)(b) of the Criminal Code is a measure of control on the part of the person deemed to be in possession…”

R. v. Miller, 1984 CanLII 637 (BC CA) (“Miller”) was about importing marijuana by boat. After the drug boat entered Canadian waters, a number of men helped transfer the drugs to shore in the middle of the night. The boat was called the Toernyn. The court considered both conspiracy and aiding-and-abetting (now section 21(1) of the Code). At paragraph 94, the court concluded: … The agreement of members of the shore party to join in the unloading, knowing as they must have known, the nature of the cargo and its origin from outside Canada, would make the members of the shore party members of the conspiracy. They may not have been parties to the conspiracy agreement when it was first made but they must have become parties to the unfulfilled conspiracy agreement before the Toernyn crossed the international boundary, and before the night-time unloading occurred, and they must have participated in the unloading or aided and abetted it. …
 
 
 
 
At paragraph 101, the court added: …all of the members of the shore party, even if they were there only as cooks, carpenters or seamen, were there to carry out their respective tasks in relation to unloading the Toernyn and caching the marijuana. They did those tasks, whatever they were, in the middle of the night; and they aided the person or persons in possession of the marijuana to acquire and hold that possession, and, by their presence and actions, they abetted that person or those persons in that possession.
 

In R. v. Pavalaki, 2014 BCCA 491 (“Pavalaki”), the accused was arrested after a marijuana grow operation was discovered in a building behind the house in which he lived. He was charged and convicted of producing marijuana. He was acquitted of possession for the purpose of trafficking. 
There was no evidence that he knew anything about the planting or the eventual harvesting and sale of the marijuana. He admitted that he noticed the odor of raw marijuana outdoors, which caused him to be suspicious. An acquaintance persuaded him to live on site. The acquaintance also persuaded him to put the hydro and cable bills in his own name (even though he would be reimbursed for hydro and cable). There were security cameras connected to monitors in an unlocked room. The accused claimed he never entered that room. There was no evidence that the accused had access to the locked outbuildings in which the marijuana was grown. The Crown argued that the accused was providing a cover for the grow operation.

At paragraph 20, the appeal court explained that the trial court found that the accused was “watching over the entire property with knowledge of the grow operation and that he was doing so, at least in part, with the intention to assist others in the production of the plants”.

The conviction for being a party to the production of marijuana was upheld.

R. v. Sekhon, 2014 SCC 15 (“Sekhon”) was an unusual case about drug couriers and expert witnesses. The accused was convicted of importing cocaine and possession for the purpose of trafficking. He drove a pickup truck across the border, and the cocaine was hidden in a concealed compartment. The accused claimed he did not know the drugs were present. There was abundant circumstantial evidence against the accused. Among other things, there was a fob that opened the compartment. The fob was on a chain with the truck keys. At the border, the accused removed the fob from the chain before giving the chain to the border officer. The Crown called an expert witness who was properly qualified as an expert on drug couriers. Among other things, the expert testified that he had never seen a “blind courier” (one who did not know he was transporting drugs). The trial judge briefly mentioned this testimony along with the abundant evidence of the accused’s guilt. 
The court found that the testimony about blind couriers was inadmissible, but the majority found that the conviction could be “saved” because of the other evidence.

At paragraph 20, the court quoted the exchange in question. The expert testified he had been involved in about 1,000 cocaine importing investigations. He testified he had never personally encountered a case in which the person importing the cocaine did not know about the drug. 
 
At paragraph 49, the majority observed: 
…the Impugned Testimony was of no probative value in determining whether [the accused] knew about the cocaine in the hidden compartment. It is trite to say that a fundamental tenet of our criminal justice system is that the guilt of an accused cannot be determined by reference to the guilt of other, unrelated accused persons. Moreover, the Impugned Testimony was not necessary because determining whether [the accused] knew about the drugs is not beyond the knowledge and experience of the judge, and it is certainly not a matter that is technical or scientific in nature. 
 
 [emphasis added]
 

At paragraph 50, the majority added: “The lack of relevance or probative value is…sufficient to justify the exclusion of the Impugned Testimony.”

The Crown relied on R. v. Stewart, 2020 ABCA 252 (“Stewart”), for the general principle that, when the charge is possession of an illegal drug, it is no defence to argue that the accused thought it was a different illegal drug (see paragraphs 20, 23 and 31). Defence counsel agreed with this general legal principle.

R. v. Briscoe, 2010 SCC 13 (“Briscoe”), nicely summarized the concept of willful blindness. At paragraph 21, the court observed: Wilful blindness does not define the mens rea required for particular offences. Rather, it can substitute for actual knowledge whenever knowledge is a component of the mens rea. The doctrine of wilful blindness imputes knowledge to an accused whose suspicion is aroused to the point where he or she sees the need for further inquiries, but deliberately chooses not to make those inquiries. See Sansregret v. The Queen, 1985 CanLII 79 (SCC), [1985] 1 S.C.R. 570, and R. v. Jorgensen, 1995 CanLII 85 (SCC), [1995] 4 S.C.R. 55. As Sopinka J. succinctly put it in Jorgensen (at para. 103), “[a] finding of wilful blindness involves an affirmative answer to the question: Did the accused shut his eyes because he knew or strongly suspected that looking would fix him with knowledge?”
 
At paragraph 24, the court compared willful blindness to “deliberate ignorance”.

R. v. Downey, 2017 ONCA 789 quoted from Briscoe with approval at paragraph 5. The accused smuggled three guns into Canada in a vehicle. The guns were hidden and the accused claimed she did not know about them. She claimed that she thought she was only bringing $4,000 cash into Canada. She did admit that her conscience was telling her that she was doing something wrong. She was found to be willfully blind, and convicted. The trial judge commented that “she made a conscious decision not to become infused with knowledge that she believed would make her culpable”.
 
Counsel referred to other cases, and I have carefully considered all of them. DECISION Deol

As noted above, I find that Deol is guilty as charged. There is no dispute about several crucial facts. Deol rented the van; his name was the only name on the rental contract; Deol was driving the van when it was pulled over; Singh testified that Deol was the only one who drove the van, and there was no evidence to the contrary; the drugs were in the van when it was pulled over; and there is no dispute about the nature or quantity of the drugs. The huge quantity meant that the offence was not simple possession.

Nor is there any real dispute about the timing of the van’s mad dash from Toronto to Vancouver and then back towards Toronto. We know the arrest was made near Brandon, Manitoba on July 28 (with the van headed eastbound). The van rental contract showed that it was rented in Toronto on July 23. 

Singh’s uncontradicted evidence was that the van drove directly from Toronto to Vancouver, and then almost immediately back towards Toronto. Singh’s uncontradicted evidence was that Singh and Deol never stayed in hotels. Singh sometimes napped while Deol drove. Deol sometimes stopped and napped in the van for about an hour. As the driver, Deol controlled the pace of the trip.


The gas receipts and Google maps show that the trip was very rapid.

Singh’s uncontradicted evidence was that, although Singh was never alone with the van, Deol was alone with it for a period of time in Vancouver.

These facts constitute abundant circumstantial evidence of Deol’s guilt.

Short of a confession, and/or fingerprint/DNA evidence, it is hard to imagine how the Crown might have had a stronger case against Deol. The police never checked for prints or DNA, so this sort of evidence did not exist.

Looking to Villaroman and the circumstantial evidence cases, was there a plausible theory (not consistent with Deol’s guilt) about how the drugs got into the van? Deol’s counsel suggested none, nor can I think of one. 

It is common ground that the drugs were extremely valuable. It is not even remotely plausible that some unknown person put them in the van for some inexplicable reason before Deol rented the van, and that Deol never noticed the drugs during the entire trip.

Singh testified that Deol took naps in the van during the trip. The naps lasted about an hour. It is not even remotely plausible that some unknown person put the drugs in the van (and left them there) for some reason while Deol was napping. 

Singh testified that, when the van stopped for gas, he sometimes went into the gas station to buy food or use the washroom. Deol obviously must have used the washroom several times during the trip. Although Singh wasn’t explicitly asked about this, it is conceivable that both Singh and Deol left the van to use a washroom at the same time. However, even if they did, it is not even remotely plausible that some unknown person at a gas station put the drugs in the van for some reason, while Deol was briefly using a washroom.

If the van had been pulled over because of an anonymous tip, perhaps a creative argument could be contemplated that some unnamed person put the drugs in the van in order to frame one or both accused, for some reason. That would frankly be far-fetched. In any event, it is academic, because the van was pulled over for speeding.

In short, to use a Villaroman analysis, the evidence does not support any plausible theory that is inconsistent with Deol’s guilt.

Deol’s counsel argued that, when he was arrested, Deol was not carrying a large quantity of cash. I suppose that, if he had been carrying a big wad of cash, that would have strengthened the Crown’s case even further. However, the absence of a big wad of cash, in and of itself, does not amount to a reasonable doubt about guilt.

Deol’s counsel pointed out that, in some respects, Deol did not fit the profile of a typical drug courier articulated by the Crown’s expert witness. As per Sekhon, I have some misgivings about the weight of the expert evidence. In Sekhon, expert evidence about drug courier patterns was ruled inadmissible. It is just a matter of common sense that, in respect of any offence, some offenders are atypical. In other words, it is possible to be both atypical and guilty, and it is possible to be typical and not guilty.

I note the undisputed principle, articulated in Stewart and other cases, that the Crown did not have to prove that Deol knew that the illegal drugs were specifically fentanyl and MDA. He just had to know that he had illegal drugs of some kind.
 

The abundant circumstantial evidence against Deol, to use the phrase from Oddleifson, “cried out for an explanation”. Deol chose not to call any evidence, which was his legal right. However, in the complete absence of any exculpatory evidence, there was nothing left but the Crown’s abundant circumstantial evidence of guilt. Singh

The evidence against Singh was also circumstantial. He was in the same van as Deol during the journey in question. He willingly agreed to participate (at least to be a passenger) in the trip from Toronto to Vancouver and back. 

It is common ground that possession requires both knowledge and control. The essence of Singh’s defence was that he had no knowledge about the drugs. He portrayed himself as an extremely unsophisticated man who knew and trusted Deol. He testified that Deol, his cousin, had never lied to him. Singh said he had never explored Canada before so, when he left Toronto, he did not know how far away Vancouver was. He testified that he could not name the provinces between Ontario and British Columbia, in order.

The Crown correctly pointed out how odd Singh’s story was. Singh testified that Deol told him that he (Deol) wanted to go to Vancouver to explore a job opportunity. Singh worked, and he wanted to be back in Toronto in time for his next shift.As the trip went on, Singh asked Deol when they would reach Vancouver. Deol kept saying things like, “a few more hours”. These assurances proved to be incorrect.

When they finally reached Vancouver, Deol left Singh for a short time. When Deol returned, he told Singh that he spoke to his contact by phone, and that there was no job opportunity after all. They then immediately began driving back to Toronto. They did no sightseeing at all.

I agree with the Crown that Singh’s story is very odd. Even if Singh implicitly trusted Deol at the start of the trip, by the time they reached Vancouver, Singh must have realized that Deol had not given him accurate information about how long the trip would take. 

Furthermore, if Deol really told Singh that the purpose of the trip was to see someone in person about a job opportunity, it would seem odd that the only contact they made was by telephone. They have telephones in Toronto. Why couldn’t Deol have remained in Toronto and spoken to his Vancouver contact by telephone? If Singh was being honest about what happened, Deol’s story must have struck Singh as odd. 

I agree with the Crown that many elements of Singh’s story are peculiar. The Crown’s theory was that Singh had actual knowledge about the presence of the drugs. Again, the Crown does not have to prove that Singh knew that the drugs were fentanyl and MDA, as opposed to some other illegal drugs. The Crown’s theory is one plausible theory.

However, as per Villaroman, when the evidence is circumstantial, the court must try to determine whether there exists a plausible theory inconsistent with guilt. I conclude that such a theory does exist. It is perfectly plausible that Deol knew about the drugs, and Singh did not.

Furthermore, as Singh testified, a W.(D.) analysis is in order. Referring to the first leg of the W.(D.) analysis, I did not believe Singh. As he was testifying through an interpreter, determining credibility was difficult. He did not actually contradict himself or evade questioning. However, the substance of his answers raises some suspicions.

I did find him credible on one point. He testified that he was in Canada on an expired Visa and that, as a result, he was nervous when the police pulled the van over. 
That assertion is perfectly logical.

I must consider Singh’s entire version of events. I agree with the Crown that his version is odd. Most people in Singh’s position would have made at least some advance attempts to find out something about the trip from Toronto to Vancouver. Singh had a job, and said he did not want to miss work. Most people in his position would have made some effort to find out roughly how long it takes to drive from Toronto to Vancouver and back. The information is very simple to obtain on the internet, in more than one language. 

If nothing else, Singh’s version of events was “fishy”. To be blunt, I did not believe him.

The second step of the W.(D.) analysis is whether Singh’s evidence raised a reasonable doubt about his guilt. I conclude that it did. The uncontradicted evidence was that he has a Grade 10 education; that his English is poor; that Deol is his cousin; that Deol had never lied to him; and that he had never travelled in Canada outside of the Toronto area.

It is perfectly plausible that Singh’s version of events, though odd, was actually true. Singh might have been less sophisticated and more naïve than average. He might have been foolish to put so much trust in his cousin. If nothing else, by the time Saturday night rolled around and they still had not reached Vancouver, Singh might have been foolish not to have started asking Deol more pointed questions.
 When Deol said he talked to his Vancouver contact by phone and now they could go back to Toronto, Singh might have been foolish not to have asked Deol some follow-up questions.

However, being unsophisticated, naïve and foolish is not a crime. It is perfectly plausible that Singh had no knowledge of the drugs (and therefore, no possession).

If possession for the purpose of trafficking were a tort, and if the Crown were suing Singh in tort, and the Crown only had to prove its case on a balance of probabilities, I might have concluded that the Crown managed to do that. It might be more likely than not that Singh was at least willfully blind as to the presence of the drugs in the van.

However, the Crown must prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt. Singh’s testimony did raise that reasonable doubt. The defence theory that Singh was unsophisticated, naïve and foolish is one plausible theory. Therefore, I have no choice but to find Singh not guilty.
 
In the event that I have erred, I will continue to the third leg of the W.(D.) analysis. I conclude that the evidence as a whole did raise a reasonable doubt as to Singh’s guilt.
 
The Crown’s expert evidence, on balance, was a neutral factor. Even if the evidence had any weight, the bottom line was that the trip in question was partly typical of a drug courier trip, and partly atypical. 
 
Singh spoke almost no English; he had no valid driver’s licence; he had an expired Visa; and he saw nothing wrong with keeping open liquor in plain view in a motor vehicle.
 
As I said, the theory that Singh was unsophisticated, naïve and foolish is one plausible theory. 
Under this theory, it is perfectly plausible that Deol simply wanted Singh’s companionship on the trip. Perhaps it gave Deol some comfort to know that Singh was in the van during Deol’s naps. Under this scenario, Deol chose to keep Singh ignorant of the true purpose of the trip. Deol knew that his cousin was both trusting and naïve, and he concluded that he could successfully deceive Singh.
 
Looking at the third W.(D.) factor, the evidence as a whole raised a reasonable doubt as to Singh’s guilt.
 
In short, a perfectly plausible theory exists under which Deol had knowledge of the drugs in the van, and Singh did not.
 
For these reasons, I find Deol guilty as charged, and I find that the Crown has not proven Singh guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
I thank counsel for agreeing to various agreed facts, and for their courteous conduct.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/mb/kb/2023mbkb7.html
 
 
On March 9/10, 2020, at approximately midnight, Travis Johnson was stabbed and killed by the accused, Dylan James Mousseau. Mr. Johnson died as a result of a single stab wound in his upper left chest area that pierced vital arteries and veins resulting in a catastrophic blood loss and his death. Mr. Mousseau admits that he stabbed Mr. Johnson.
 
 
Mr. Mousseau stands charged with second degree murder for causing Mr. Johnson’s death. One of the primary contested issues in this case is whether, when Mr. Mousseau stabbed Mr. Johnson, he was acting in lawful self-defence or defence of others under s. 34 of the Criminal Code, R.S.C., 1985, c. C-46 (the “Code”).
 
 
Section 34 states: Defence – use or threat of force
 
34 (1) A person is not guilty of an offence if (a) they believe on reasonable grounds that force is being used against them or another person or that a threat of force is being made against them or another person; (b) the act that constitutes the offence is committed for the purpose of defending or protecting themselves or the other person from that use or threat of force; and (c) the act committed is reasonable in the circumstances.
 
Factors
 
(2) In determining whether the act committed is reasonable in the circumstances, the court shall consider the relevant circumstances of the person, the other parties and the act, including, but not limited to, the following factors:
 
(a) the nature of the force or threat;
 
(b) the extent to which the use of force was imminent and whether there were other means available to respond to the potential use of force;
 
(c) the person’s role in the incident;
 
(d) whether any party to the incident used or threatened to use a weapon;
 
(e) the size, age, gender and physical capabilities of the parties to the incident;
 
(f) the nature, duration and history of any relationship between the parties to the incident, including any prior use or threat of force and the nature of that force or threat;
 
(f.1) any history of interaction or communication between the parties to the incident;
 
(g) the nature and proportionality of the person’s response to the use or threat of force; and
 
(h) whether the act committed was in response to a use or threat of force that the person knew was lawful.
 
 
 
 
The onus of proof is on the Crown to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Mousseau was not acting lawfully under s. 34(1) when he killed Mr. Johnson. The Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that at least one of the three essential requirements for self-defence in s. 34(1)(a)(b) or (c) is not met. If the Crown is unable to satisfy this burden, I must find Mr. Mousseau not guilty of second degree murder.
 
 
If the Crown meets its burden of proving that Mr. Mousseau was not acting in lawful self-defence under s. 34(1) when he stabbed and killed Mr. Johnson, it follows that Mr. Johnson’s death was a culpable homicide. I must then consider whether the evidence proves that Mr. Mousseau is guilty of committing second degree murder, which is the offence charged against him. If I am not satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that all the essential elements of second degree murder have been established on the evidence, I must find Mr. Mousseau not guilty of second degree murder, but guilty of the included offence of manslaughter, since s. 234 of the Code provides that “culpable homicide that is not murder or infanticide is manslaughter.”
 
 
Culpable homicide is murder pursuant to s. 229 of the Code where the person who causes the death of a human being either “means to cause his death, or means to cause him bodily harm that he knows is likely to cause his death, and is reckless whether death ensues or not”.
 
 
If I were to find beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Mousseau did have the necessary intent for murder, I must then consider the partial defence of provocation pursuant to s. 232 of the Code. Section 232 sets out conditions under which culpable homicide that otherwise would be murder may be reduced to manslaughter. The onus is on the Crown to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that this partial defence does not apply in this case.
 
 
In summary, to find Mr. Mousseau guilty of second degree murder, the Crown must prove four essential things beyond a reasonable doubt:





i.


 That Mr. Mousseau caused Mr. Johnson’s death;



 
ii.





That Mr. Johnson’s death was a culpable homicide. In this case, that means the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Mousseau was not acting in lawful self-defence under s. 34 of the Code when he killed Mr. Johnson;



 
iii.





If the Crown disproves self-defence, the Crown must prove that when Mr. Mousseau killed Mr. Johnson he did so with either one of the two alternative states of mind set out in s. 229 of the Code. If I am not satisfied that the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt the necessary intent for murder, I must find Mr. Mousseau not guilty of second degree murder, but guilty of the included offence of manslaughter;



 
iv.





Even if the Crown proves that Mr. Mousseau did not kill Mr. Johnson in lawful self-defence, and that he did so with a subjective mental state necessary to make the killing second degree murder, the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Mousseau’s culpability is not reduced to manslaughter by the partial defence of provocation in s. 232 of the Code. (See R. v. Khill, 2021 SCC 37, 462 D.L.R. (4th) 389 (QL), and R. v. P.S., 2022 ONSC 3894, [2022] O.J. No. 3408) Evidence
 
 
The audio recording of the 911 calls was filed by consent and includes two different calls made shortly after midnight on March 10, 2020. One call was made by Chantal Ouellette, who provides information to the 911 operator and to the police. Ms. Clarisse Kennedy is heard on the 911 call screaming loudly in the background and Ms. Ouellette is passing on information about the person who was stabbed, Mr. Johnson and Mr. Mousseau, the person who stabbed Mr. Johnson. Ms. Ouellette repeats the information provided by Ms. Kennedy that the weapon used was a machete and that the stabber, Mr. Mousseau had left the scene of the incident. First Police Officers on Scene

The Crown called several police officers who attended at the scene at 588 Elgin Avenue in the City of Winnipeg (the “property”).

When the first officers arrived at the property, there were two males in the back yard. One of the males fled on a bicycle around the right side of the property. Constable Simoens gave chase, but was unable to catch that individual.

Constables McDonald and Simoens entered the property through the back door leading inside the kitchen and observed Mr. Johnson lying on the floor bleeding profusely, with Ms. Kennedy cradling his head in her arms. The officers described Mr. Johnson’s feet as pointing towards the back door and his head towards the living room inside the kitchen area. Ms. Kennedy was hysterical and other officers arrived to assist by taking her to the living room. One of the officers administered CPR until the Winnipeg Fire Paramedic Services paramedics arrived at the scene. Neither of the officers recall seeing bicycles belonging to Ms. Kennedy and Mr. Johnson inside the kitchen. Bikes were seen outside of the back door of the property when they arrived.

Both officers accompanied Mr. Johnson to the Health Sciences Centre where he was pronounced dead. Forensic Identification Section Officers

Two forensic identification section officers, Constables McLauchlan and Cifuentes attended the property to gather evidence and take photographs. They attended initially and then re-attended later in the day with a search warrant to conduct a more thorough examination.

Constable Cifuentes acted as the scene photographer and Cst. McLauchlan acted as the exhibit officer.

As a result of their examination at the scene and at the autopsy, a number of items were seized and hundreds of photographs were taken. The Crown filed, by consent, a book of scene photographs (Exhibit 1), and a book of autopsy photographs (Exhibit 2). Items of clothes that were cut off Mr. Johnson by the paramedics in the kitchen as well as his backpack were seized and marked as Exhibits 3 to 7. No weapon was found at the scene.

Constable McLauchlan examined the clothing worn by Mr. Johnson and when it was configured in the same fashion as it had been worn by Mr. Johnson, there was a roughly five centimetre contiguous hole in each of the items that was consistent with the stab wound injury to Mr. Johnson. Dr. Jason Morin, Forensic Pathologist

Dr. Morin conducted an autopsy on March 11, 2020. His report (Exhibit 9) together with corresponding autopsy photos (Exhibit 2), detailed his findings. His qualifications as a forensic pathologist were not challenged and I was satisfied that he was qualified to give expert opinion evidence on the cause of death. Mr. Johnson was noted as five feet nine inches tall and weighed roughly 145 pounds. There was a single stab wound to his left chest that travelled through the pectoral wall, cutting the left subclavian artery, left subclavian vein, left lung and left second rib. The cause of death was rapid blood loss as a result of the stab wound.

Dr. Morin described the wound as going on a slightly downward trajectory at a five to eleven o’clock angle. Eleven o’clock being the entry point down towards five o’clock. He described the size and nature of the wound as consistent with a machete, larger knife or even a hunting knife. The force required was “not insignificant” as it pierced the pectoral wall and cut into the ribs which was a distance of about 12 centimeters. The knife also cut the clothing and backpack worn by Mr. Johnson.

Dr. Morin was shown photos of a number of small contusions on Mr. Johnson’s face and left forearm. He could not give a definitive opinion about whether those injuries occurred at the same time as the incident. He was also unable to say whether the contusions were “offensive or defensive” wounds.

Dr. Morin confirmed that the toxicology report showed Mr. Johnson had a “low to moderate” amount of crystal methamphetamine in his system as well as “low to moderate” amount of THC (one of the active ingredients of cannabis) in his system. During cross-examination, Dr. Morin admitted that the presence of the drugs may have affected Mr. Johnson’s behaviour, but that would depend on the timing of his use and his tolerance for drugs in general. Civilian Witnesses



 Chantal Ouellette

The Crown called Ms. Ouellette, who was a resident at the property, her room being closest to the bannister located in the kitchen. She knew Mr. Mousseau as the son of another tenant, Cynthia Mousseau who rented a room farthest from the kitchen, near the front door of the property. She confirmed, as did other witnesses, that the front door of the property was not used and the back door was the only way in or out. The back door in shown in the photographs leading outdoors from the kitchen.

Ms. Ouellette testified regarding her recollection of the incident. She was at home doing laundry in the basement. She saw Mr. Mousseau come in with another woman that she did not recognize. Ms. Ouellette described Mr. Mousseau as a five out of ten in terms of his sobriety and that he was “getting rowdy”.

Ms. Ouellette did not witness the altercation between Mr. Mousseau, Mr. Johnson, and Ms. Kennedy. She stated that she knew Ms. Kennedy but did not know her boyfriend, Mr. Johnson.

Ms. Oullette remained in the basement and her testimony was based primarily on what she recalled hearing from the basement. She partially saw that Mr. Mousseau was in the kitchen and recalled that there was an argument between Mr. Mousseau and Ms. Kennedy about five dollars. Ms. Ouellette recalled Ms. Kennedy stating words to the effect of “why do you wanna do me like that over five dollars”. She also heard Mr. Mousseau say words to the effect of “give me your stuff” and something about chasing them (Ms. Kennedy and Mr. Johnson). She agreed during cross-examination that it sounded like Mr. Mousseau thought he was owed money and that she was not certain about exactly what else was said.

Ms. Ouellette testified that she did not hear words or actions directed at Mr. Johnson. Nor did she see Mr. Johnson with a weapon or implement such as a pole or mop in his hands at any time. She admitted that she was peeking up the stairs at various times and that the accused was in the main part of the kitchen and Ms. Kennedy and Mr. Johnson were closer to the back door.

Ms. Ouellette also testified about sounds she heard and described them as a “bit of a scuffle”. She stated that her bike was perched on the bannister which fell down the stairs. She also heard Ms. Kennedy state “stop it--don’t”. During cross-examination she acknowledged that she did not know to whom Ms. Kennedy was speaking when she said “stop it--don’t”.

After the scuffle, Ms. Ouellette saw the accused run out the back door. When she came up the stairs from the basement she saw Mr. Johnson lying on the floor bleeding with Ms. Kennedy screaming and cradling his head. She called 911 and confirmed that the 911 recording was her voice.

As to the presence of a mop and brooms on the floor in the kitchen, she surmised that the mop/brooms had fallen over during the scuffle. A black bucket was knocked over and she was not sure if this was a trash can or a bucket used for the mop. She did not see the scuffle or see Mr. Johnson use a mop or a pole and did not witness Mr. Johnson being stabbed.



 Shelley Govereau

Ms. Govereau was, at the material time, a resident at the property. Her room had a door leading directly into the kitchen, right across from the bannister. She acknowledged that she knew the accused and that he often stayed with his mother who was also a tenant at the property, Ms. Cynthia Mousseau.

She acknowledged that she was “pretty messed up” on drugs and alcohol at the time of the incident. After the stabbing, she left the property and called 911, but did not return.

She recalled that Ms. Kennedy and her boyfriend showed up at the property and that she had a discussion with them. She also recalled that the accused came into the kitchen where she, Ms. Kennedy and Mr. Johnson were. She described the accused as being closest to the kitchen sink area with Ms. Kennedy and Mr. Johnson closer to the bannister at the end near the stairs leading to the basement.

She testified she heard the accused say “something about five dollars” and “something about a bike”. Her description of what was said was vague and she admitted she was very unclear as to exactly what was said. During cross-examination she agreed with the suggestion that Mr. Mousseau asked Ms. Kennedy for money she owed him.

As the argument progressed between Ms. Kennedy and Mr. Mousseau, she went back into her bedroom as it sounded “stupid” to her. She did not see or hear the scuffle or altercation or witness the stabbing.

As to the location of the mop, she indicated that it was normally on the back wall near the door or bathroom area. She admitted that she used drugs but denied she sold drugs or that Ms. Kennedy was there to purchase drugs from her on March 9/10, 2020.



 Clarisse Kennedy

The primary witness relied upon as part of the Crown’s case is Ms. Kennedy. She admitted to a lengthy criminal record that includes crimes of dishonesty and some violence. She has previously been convicted of fraud, perjury, obstruction of justice and assaulting a peace officer. She explained that her convictions occurred at a time when she was dealing with significant substance abuse issues.

Ms. Kennedy is forty years of age and currently resides in second-stage housing to help her address her prior substance abuse issues. She testified that she has been sober for 15 months.

She testified regarding her relationship with Mr. Johnson and described him as her “soulmate”. She stated that both she and Mr. Johnson were attempting to stay sober at the time of the incident, but that there had been some missteps. She described the incident and altercation with Mr. Mousseau in detail. She was asked about the presence of methamphetamine and THC found in the toxicology report following Mr. Johnson’s death and stated that she did know when he last used and that she was not with him during the entire day/evening on March 9-10, 2020.

Ms. Kennedy knew Ms. Govereau and had visited the property on a number of occasions in the past to either visit or buy drugs from Ms. Govereau. She admitted that in the past she had purchased methamphetamine from Ms. Govereau. However, on the night of the incident she and Mr. Johnson went there to purchase marijuana.

They arrived shortly before midnight and they brought their bikes into the back door area of the kitchen so that they would not be stolen from the rear of the property. They saw Ms. Ouellette and Ms. Govereau and she introduced Mr. Johnson to them in the kitchen area. A short time after their arrival, Mr. Mousseau came into the kitchen and she described him as drunk and belligerent. Mr. Mousseau was aggressively asking her and Mr. Johnson for their “stuff” and when she refused, Mr. Mousseau began to threaten them. She stated that Mr. Mousseau said words to the effect of “if they tried to leave that he would chase them down the back lane and stab the shit out of them”.

Ms. Kennedy threw a five-dollar bill towards Mr. Mousseau in an effort to appease him and then told Mr. Johnson that they should leave. A five-dollar bill was found on the floor in the kitchen after the incident.

Ms. Kennedy testified Mr. Mousseau went back through the kitchen door toward his Mom’s bedroom and then returned to the kitchen. Mr. Johnson had already moved one of the bikes out the back door and was in the process of moving the second bike out the doorway when Mr. Mousseau lunged forward, past her left side and without any warning or any provocation, stabbed Mr. Johnson. 
She stated that she did not see the knife until Mr. Mousseau pulled it away from Mr. Johnson and immediately thereafter, Mr. Johnson slumped to the ground. At that point, she stated that Mr. Mousseau attempted to grab Mr. Johnson’s backpack and Ms. Kennedy told him to “fuck off, you stabbed him”. 
The accused then left out the back door. She recalled screaming and getting people to call 911 to help Mr. Johnson.

During cross-examination, she denied ever borrowing any money from Mr. Mousseau and stated that he had nothing to lend. She denied that Mr. Johnson was the aggressor at any time or that he used a mop or pole to strike Mr. Mousseau. She denied all suggestions made by defence counsel as to the version of events based on Mr. Mousseau’s anticipated testimony.



 Dylan Mousseau

Mr. Mousseau is 24 years of age and has seven siblings. In March 2020, he was unemployed and staying with his mom, Cynthia Mousseau at the property. He admitted that he had a criminal record dating back to 2016-2019 as a result of hanging around with the “wrong crowd” and getting into trouble. 
He had a daughter in 2018 and was shot in 2019 when he was on a bike near the Maryland Hotel vendor. The injury was serious and he had multiple surgeries. 
He testified that these two incidents caused him to start getting his life together. He said he stayed off the streets and stayed out of trouble after the shooting.

Mr. Mousseau’s version of what took place in the kitchen at the property around midnight on March 9/10, 2020, is totally different than the version of events described by Ms. Kennedy.

Mr. Mousseau testified that he had been drinking with his cousin and uncle earlier in the evening, sharing a bottle of Captain Morgan’s Spiced Rum, in which he stated that he drank approximately one-third of the bottle. 
He estimated that he was a five out of ten in terms of sobriety. He had a female friend come by and they were in his room listening to music.

Mr. Mousseau came out of his room to get some water and as he entered the kitchen, he saw Ms. Kennedy and Mr. Johnson. He testified that he had previously lent $30 to Ms. Kennedy and asked her for the money.

Mr. Mousseau explained that he only knew Ms. Kennedy as an acquaintance and that he knew she was a drug user and someone who visited Ms. Govereau from time-to-time. Notwithstanding that, he lent her $30 because Ms. Kennedy told him that she knew his Dad and that she had helped him when he “OD’d”. The accused stated that he lent the money because he thought she was good for it, and she agreed to pay him back in a few days when she “got her cheque”.

When Mr. Mousseau asked her to pay him back, she said that she had no money and his response was “but you have money to buy drugs”, or words to that effect. Mr. Mousseau also stated that maybe she should sell her bike to pay him back, or words to that effect. Mr. Mousseau stated that she did not reply, but said to Mr. Johnson, “let’s go”.

Mr. Mousseau denied stating that he would chase them down the back lane and stab them or words to that effect and testified that Ms. Kennedy stated “what are you going to do, chase us down the street and jack us?” Mr. Mousseau remembered something about five dollars and agreed it was possible that Ms. Kennedy threw five dollars at him.

Mr. Mousseau testified that Mr. Johnson took the first bike outside and then came back for the second bike. He removed the second bike and both Ms. Kennedy and Mr. Johnson were outside the house. Mr. Mousseau went to the door as it had been left ajar and as he went to shut it, he stated that Mr. Johnson attacked him without warning, coming back through the door striking him in the forehead once with what he described as a pole or a stick. He testified this sent him backwards toward the kitchen sink and claimed that he felt dizzy. He said the altercation happened very fast and as he looked up, he saw Mr. Johnson coming at him again with a “pole or a stick”. At that point, the accused indicated that he “panicked” and “feared for his life”, pulled out a hunting knife from a sheath on his waistband and made a thrusting motion forward with the knife and struck Mr. Johnson in the chest area.

As to why he carried a hunting knife, Mr. Mousseau explained that Ms. Govereau was selling drugs at the house and there were unsavory characters at the property. He carried the knife for protection. He also referenced the previous incident in 2019 in which he had been shot at the Maryland Hotel. He started carrying a knife after that incident.

After the stabbing, he went back to his Mom’s room, grabbed his shoes, jacket and backpack and then ran back through the kitchen and out the back door. He stated that he was scared, panicked and had never been in this type of a situation before. He went to his cousin Fox’s place and stayed there.

Mr. Mousseau did not call 911 or go to the police and turn himself in. Mr. Mousseau remained at large and was ultimately arrested at his grandmother’s residence on May 12, 2020. He had opportunities to tell the police his version of what occurred but exercised his right to remain silent.

At the time of the incident, Mr. Mousseau was six feet three inches tall and weighed about 145 pounds. He believed that the “pole or stick” that he had mentioned previously was in fact a mop handle and identified the mop as seen in photos 5, 6, 8 and 10 of Exhibit 1, on the kitchen floor. He acknowledged that he pieced this together once he saw the photographs. When asked about the location of the mop at the property, he indicated that he had seen it in the kitchen, the bathroom, the basement and outside on the back deck.

Mr. Mousseau confirmed that he had no argument or physical altercation with Mr. Johnson and had no reason for any animosity towards him. The discussion about paying him back was solely with Ms. Kennedy. He offered no explanation as to why Mr. Johnson attacked him and expressed remorse for having caused his death.

During cross-examination, he admitted that he had a previous conviction for possession of methamphetamine and contrary to his direct evidence, he had issues with drugs in the past.

Mr. Mousseau completely denied that the incident unfolded as described by Ms. Kennedy. He stated she was not being truthful. He admitted that he had no money and no employment at the time and lived off whatever money was provided by his stepfather and mother. He confirmed that he had no money on the night of the incident. Nevertheless, he denied the suggestion that he attempted to rob Ms. Kennedy and Mr. Johnson.

As to his knife, Mr. Mousseau testified that it was stolen from his grandmother’s home and he stated that lots of family members were in and out of the home. He did not know who took the knife. It was never located by the police. He did acknowledge that the drawing of the knife completed in court by Ms. Kennedy was similar to the knife he had and used to stab Mr. Johnson.

The accused was cross-examined about other steps that he may have taken instead of stabbing Mr. Johnson. It was suggested that he could have retreated to his Mom’s room, could have yelled out for help, wrestled the pole or mop away from Mr. Johnson or warned him. Mr. Mousseau’s response was “I don’t know”, “I was scared”, “I panicked”, and that he had “never been in that situation before”, or similar words to each suggested alternative.

Mr. Mousseau denied that he did anything to provoke Mr. Johnson and had no rational explanation to offer for the attack. Rebuttal Evidence

After hearing submissions, I allowed the Crown to recall Ms. Kennedy to address an assertion made by Mr. Mousseau that was not put to her during her testimony. Specifically, she was asked whether she knew Mr. Mousseau’s father or step-father and had ever helped him when he overdosed. She denied knowing Mr. Mousseau’s step-father or father and denied having knowledge of or ever helping either of them with an overdose. Position of the Parties

The Crown and the defence agree that Mr. Mousseau caused Mr. Johnson’s death. However, they disagree regarding whether Mr. Johnson’s death was a culpable homicide. The Crown submits that it has proved beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Mousseau was not acting in lawful self-defence under s. 34 of the Code when he killed Mr. Johnson. The Crown submits that the court should disbelieve the version of events given by the accused, as his version has no air of reality. The Crown submits that the accused’s version of events is diametrically opposed to the version given by Ms. Kennedy and both versions cannot be true. The Crown urges the court to accept the testimony of Ms. Kennedy and therefore accept the Crown has met the onus of proving beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused should be convicted of second degree murder or manslaughter. Further, the Crown submits that it has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that at least one of the three essential requirements for self-defence in s. 34(1)(a)(b) or (c) is not met.

The strongest argument advanced by the Crown relates to the reasonableness of Mr. Mousseau’s response. Considering the factors set out in s. 34(2) of the Code, the Crown submits that Mr. Mousseau did not act reasonably in the circumstances.

The Crown also submits that Mr. Mousseau had the intent for murder and the Crown has established that beyond a reasonable doubt. The Crown submits that this was an attempted robbery and when they refused his demand, Mr. Mousseau retrieved his hunting knife and attacked Mr. Johnson with a fatal stab wound in his chest near his neck and heart.

In the alternative, the Crown submits that if the court accepts all or even some of Mr. Mousseau’s evidence and is of the view that the essential elements of self-defence must be considered to decide the case, the Crown acknowledges that imputing the intent for murder on Mr. Mousseau is difficult.

As to provocation, the Crown submits that there is no air of reality to this defence and submits that the partial defence does not apply on the facts and circumstances of this case.

The defence submits that Mr. Mousseau’s evidence is believable or at the very least, raises a reasonable doubt as to the Crown’s theory of the case. The evidence of the witnesses including Ms. Ouellette and Ms. Govereau provide corroborative support that is more consistent with Mr. Mousseau’s version of events than the evidence of Ms. Kennedy. The defence submits that the independent evidence including the location of the mop, the location of the two bikes and the toxicology findings are entirely consistent with Mr. Mousseau’s version of events.

Further, the defence submits that the Crown’s case is based almost entirely on the evidence of Ms. Kennedy. Ms. Kennedy is a witness of an unsavory character with a long history of convictions for crimes including crimes of dishonesty. The court should be very careful in accepting her evidence, unless there is other independent evidence corroborating her version of the evidence. (See R. v. Vetrovec, 1982 CanLII 20 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 811, S.C.J. No. 40)

The defence also submits that if Mr. Mousseau’s evidence is accepted, or raises a reasonable doubt, then the factual basis for the first two elements of self-defence have been established. As well, the defence submits that Mr. Mousseau had reasonable grounds to believe that force was being used against him and that he did act for a defensive purpose in stabbing Mr. Johnson.

As to the third element, the defence submits that Mr. Mousseau’s use of force was reasonable in the circumstances, as a result of an analysis of the factors set out in s. 34(2) of the Code. The defence submits that the Crown has not met the burden of disproving that Mr. Mousseau’s use of force was reasonable in the circumstances.

The defence also submits that Mr. Mousseau did not have the requisite intent to commit murder pursuant to s. 229(a)(i) or (ii) of the Code.

Finally, the defence submits that the defence of provocation is largely subsumed in the analysis of intent. However, provocation may in fact ground an independent partial defence reducing murder to manslaughter, even in circumstances where the mental element for murder is otherwise proven. The Crown has failed to disprove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Mousseau’s culpability is not reduced to manslaughter on the partial defence of provocation.
 
Analysis and Decision

As stated earlier, the Crown must prove four essential things beyond a reasonable doubt. The Crown must first establish that Mr. Mousseau caused Mr. Johnson’s death. I have no hesitation in finding that the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Mousseau caused Mr. Johnson’s death. Mr. Mousseau testified regarding the fatal stab wound that he inflicted on Mr. Johnson. The report and testimony of the pathologist establishes that Mr. Johnson died as a result of the single stab wound which severed vital arteries and veins near Mr. Johnson’s neck.

Second, the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Johnson’s death was a culpable homicide. That means the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Mousseau was not acting in lawful self-defence under s. 34 of the Code when he killed Mr. Johnson.

Since Mr. Mousseau testified the governing framework of analysis in R. v. W. (D.), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 742, at pp. 757-58 applies. It is important to note that the framework of analysis applies with some modification when dealing with self-defence.

The first branch of the standard W. (D.) instruction, in which triers of fact are directed that “if you believe the evidence of the accused, obviously you must acquit”, must be modified where self-defence is at issue because the essential elements of this defence are partly objective. Even if I believe Mr. Mousseau’s account of what occurred or it raises a reasonable doubt about what transpired, I may still reject that he acted in self-defence on the ground that Mr. Mousseau’s use of force was not reasonable in all the circumstances. (See P.S., at para. 139)

As pointed out in R. v. Theriault, 2020 ONSC 3317, O.J. No. 2825, at para. 29, aff’d 2021 ONCA 517: 29

Lastly, where the defence advanced contains an objective component, as is the case with self-defence or use of reasonable force in the commission of a lawful arrest, the W. (D.) analysis must be modified accordingly. The defendant's evidence will, in such instances, only result in an acquittal where that evidence establishes or leaves the trier of fact with a reasonable doubt about the objective component of the defence; see R. v. Ryon, 2019 ABCA 36 at para. 31 and R. v. Reid, (2003) 2003 CanLII 14779 (ON CA), 65 O.R. (3d) 723 (Ont.C.A.) at para. 72.
 
 

The Crown submits that there is no air of reality to Mr. Mousseau’s version of what transpired at the property and the court should reject his version of events entirely. Further, the Crown submits that the court should accept the evidence of Ms. Kennedy as to what transpired and therefore Mr. Mousseau should be convicted of murder or if not murder, manslaughter.

While there is no dispute that Mr. Mousseau stabbed Mr. Johnson, there is a serious dispute as to how the altercation started and unfolded.

Mr. Mousseau testified that he lent Ms. Kennedy $30 and that she had failed to repay the debt. When he saw Ms. Kennedy and Mr. Johnson in the kitchen, he asked for repayment and the altercation escalated from there.

Ms. Kennedy denied that she borrowed any money from Mr. Mousseau.
 She said he had no money and that the explanation provided by Mr. Mousseau that she had previously assisted her father or stepfather was a lie. She testified that she did not know Mr. Mousseau’s father or stepfather and had never assisted one of them when one of them had overdosed.

Ms. Kennedy testified that Mr. Mousseau was intoxicated and belligerent from the moment he came into the kitchen and that he attempted to rob her and Mr. Johnson.

Ms. Kennedy’s evidence was that there was no discussion between Mr. Mousseau and Mr. Johnson and that Mr. Johnson did nothing to provoke Mr. Mousseau at all. Specifically, she denied that Mr. Johnson struck Mr. Mousseau with a pole, stick or a mop handle or that there was any threat of force made against Mr. Mousseau whatsoever. She stated that they were attempting to leave when Mr. Mousseau unexpectedly stabbed Mr. Johnson.

Given Ms. Kennedy’s criminal history, which includes crimes of dishonesty including perjury, I have serious concerns about accepting her version of what transpired without confirmatory evidence.

The evidence from the other witnesses, including Ms. Govereau and Ms. Ouellette to a certain extent corroborates Mr. Mousseau’s evidence about lending money to Ms. Kennedy and seeking repayment. Ms. Govereau testified that Mr. Mousseau walked into the kitchen and asked Ms. Kennedy if she had the money that she owed him. Ms. Kennedy responded that she did not and when the discussion escalated, Ms. Govereau testified that she did not want to become part of the argument, called it “stupid” and returned to her room.

Ms. Ouellette testified that she heard the discussion respecting the sum of five dollars and agreed with the suggestion during cross-examination that Mr. Mousseau was seeking repayment of money from Ms. Kennedy.

Ms. Govereau recalled the discussion about five dollars. She also recalled a discussion about the bikes, but provided no further detail. 
Ms. Ouellette was doing laundry in the basement and recalled hearing something about five dollars and heard something said by Mr. Mousseau about giving him something or he would chase them, however she admitted that she could not make out exactly what was said. During cross-examination she was unsure whether the word “chase” was used.

Ms. Ouellette heard Ms. Kennedy say “stop it -- don’t”, but was not able to say to whom Ms. Kennedy was speaking.

In assessing all of the evidence, I am not sure I believe either Mr. Mousseau or Ms. Kennedy as to how the altercation started and unfolded. In my view, based on the independent evidence, it is not clear whether this was a robbery scenario or a demand for repayment. The evidence of the other witnesses, although not strong, does corroborate Mr. Mouseau’s version of events that he was demanding repayment of money or a loan.

What happens next is equally unclear. Mr. Mousseau testified that once Mr. Johnson had removed both bikes from the kitchen, he went to the door to close it and Mr. Johnson appeared with a pole or stick in his hands and hit and struck him in the forehead. Ms. Kennedy denied that a pole or stick was used at all and maintained that Mr. Mousseau was the sole aggressor.

I agree with the submission of the defence that the photographs of the scene show that the mop was found on the floor in the kitchen where the altercation occurred and close to where Mr. Johnson lay on the floor. That evidence lends credence to Mr. Mousseau’s version of events that the stick or pole was in fact the mop handle that was used to strike him. On the other hand, the location of the mop handle may be explained on the basis that it was knocked over during the “scuffle” heard by Ms. Ouellette from the basement.

While there is conflicting evidence as to where the mop was generally kept, it appears the independent witnesses believed the mop was usually located against the back wall of the kitchen or in or near the bathroom area. 
Mr. Mousseau’s evidence that Mr. Johnson came back through the door with the pole or stick in his hand seems unlikely. It is more likely that Mr. Johnson grabbed the mop as came back into the kitchen to stop Mr. Mousseau from following through with his threat.

The police officers that examined the scene did examine the mop and concluded it was not used to clean the premises of blood after the altercation. It appears the police did not examine the mop for fingerprints or conduct any DNA analysis because they had no knowledge that the mop may have been used to strike Mr. Mousseau prior to the stabbing. Mr. Mousseau was not arrested until May 12, 2020, and the first time his evidence regarding the altercation and Mr. Johnson’s use of the mop was divulged was when Mr. Mousseau testified at trial. Ms. Kennedy had been interviewed immediately after the incident but the police were not advised that a pole or mop was used by Mr. Johnson during the altercation.

No other witness testified that they saw Mr. Johnson use the mop handle to strike Mr. Mousseau. No witness gave an explanation as to how the mop ended up on the floor in the kitchen close to where Mr. Johnson lay on the floor following the stabbing.

In my view, the location of the mop following the altercation lends credence to Mr. Mousseau’s version of what transpired, that the mop was used by Mr. Johnson either as a weapon or perhaps to defend himself once Mr. Mousseau brandished the knife.

Ms. Ouellette’s evidence that she heard Ms. Kennedy say “stop it -- don’t”, does not necessarily support the Crown’s theory that she was speaking to Mr. Mousseau. Ms. Ouellette was uncertain as to whom Ms. Kennedy was speaking. Ms. Kennedy testified that she did not see the knife until after Mr. Mousseau pulled it back from stabbing Mr. Johnson. The Crown relies on her version of events. If her evidence is to be believed on that point, it seems unlikely that she was speaking to Mr. Mousseau when she said “stop it -- don’t”. 
She did not know Mr. Mousseau had stabbed Mr. Johnson until after it occurred. 
There was only one stab with the knife.

A reasonable inference to be drawn from this evidence is that Ms. Kennedy was speaking to Mr. Johnson once he had picked up the mop handle and threatened to strike or did strike Mr. Mousseau. In other words, she was telling her boyfriend to “stop it--don’t” use the mop.

While I do not necessarily believe the versions of either Mr. Mousseau or Ms. Kennedy, the evidence of Mr. Mousseau raises a reasonable doubt as to the manner in which the altercation unfolded. I say this for a number of reasons: i)




The evidence of Ms. Govereau and Ms. Ouellette do not necessarily confirm Ms. Kennedy’s version of the altercation; ii)


 
Ms. Govereau and Ms. Ouellette do not confirm that they heard the specific threats made by Mr. Mousseau which Ms. Kennedy attributed to him. 
They both confirm that the argument appeared to be over money which is consistent with Mr. Mousseau’s evidence. iii)


 
During cross-examination, Ms. Kennedy acknowledged that she did not tell the police that Mr. Mousseau had threatened to “chase them” and “stab the shit out of them”. iv)



Ms. Kennedy gave inconsistent evidence regarding whether Mr. Johnson had removed one or both of the bikes from the kitchen prior to the altercation. 
She initially stated that no one had left through the back door prior to the altercation. On cross-examination, she was presented with statements she made to the police and her evidence at her preliminary inquiry that Mr. Johnson had removed one bike from the kitchen and that they were in the process of removing the second. When the police first arrived at the scene, two bikes were found outside of the residence and there is no evidence that any other person removed the bikes from the kitchen area. v)


 
Mr. Mousseau’s evidence that Mr. Johnson had removed both bikes from the kitchen and then returned is consistent with the evidence found at the scene when the police arrived. vi)



All of the witnesses testified that Mr. Mousseau left the residence immediately following the altercation and I agree with the defence that this may be consistent with him being in a state of fear and/or panic. vii)

 
I do not believe Ms. Kennedy’s evidence that Mr. Johnson did nothing to provoke the stabbing. For the reasons noted above, including the location of the mop after the stabbing as well as her statement of “stop it -- don’t”. 
This evidence is consistent with Mr. Johnson using the mop against Mr. Mousseau and Ms. Kennedy yelling at Mr. Johnson “stop it -- don’t”. viii)

 
No personal possessions including the backpack or the five dollars were taken by Mr. Mousseau when he departed, which is inconsistent with the robbery version given by Ms. Kennedy.
 
Dr. Morin testified that the toxicology report confirmed Mr. Johnson had a quantity of methamphetamine as well as THC in his blood. He confirmed that the amounts found were consistent with recreational use of these drugs. During cross-examination, he acknowledged that these drugs could cause many symptoms which may include paranoia, panic reactions, anxiety and other mood changes. He was not in a position to offer any opinion regarding Mr. Johnson, given that he had no knowledge of his past use and tolerance. The defence submitted and I agree that the presence of these drugs may have caused Mr. Johnson to act in a paranoid or inappropriate manner based on his perception of threats from Mr. Mousseau.
 
The evidence was that Ms. Kennedy and Mr. Johnson were attempting to purchase marijuana from Ms. Govereau. I do not accept Ms. Govereau’s evidence on that issue. Ms. Kennedy testified that Mr. Johnson had suffered from an anxiety or panic attack earlier in the evening after attending at the Windsor Hotel. She thought the marijuana might help.
 
In considering all of the evidence, I must consider that the presence of drugs found in Mr. Johnson’s system may have caused him to perceive a threat from Mr. Mousseau, and therefore attempt to stop him from being aggressive towards his girlfriend, Ms. Kennedy, or from carrying out what he may have threatened to do, chase them the back lane and stab them.
 
I am satisfied that it would be dangerous to accept the evidence of Ms. Kennedy, an unsavoury witness with a history of convictions for crimes of dishonesty, without independent evidence which tends to support or confirm the material parts of her testimony.
 
I accept that Ms. Kennedy may have taken steps to turn her life around and may have done her best to tell the truth. I am not satisfied that the independent evidence supports her version of events. She described Mr. Johnson as her soulmate and I am satisfied she wanted to paint him as an innocent bystander during the altercation. I am not satisfied he was. I accept that the accused has raised a reasonable doubt regarding the events that transpired and specifically how the altercation occurred. I am satisfied there is an air of reality to the position that Mr. Mousseau acted in self-defence. This leads me to an analysis of that defence. Has the Crown disproved self-defence?
 
As I stated earlier, pursuant to s. 34(1) of the Code, self-defence or defence of others has three essential elements. The Crown must prove that Mr. Mousseau did not kill Mr. Johnson in lawful self-defence. It is the Crown’s burden to disprove at least one of these three essential elements beyond a reasonable doubt. a)


 
Did Mr. Mousseau believe on reasonable grounds that force was being used against him or another person? (s. 34(1)(a))
 
In Khill, the Supreme Court of Canada described the first element of self-defence as “the catalyst”. I must consider Mr. Mousseau’s state of mind and the perception of events that led him to act as he did. In my view, the Crown has failed to prove that Mr. Mousseau was not attacked by Mr. Johnson with a pole, stick or mop. I am satisfied that there is a basis for concluding that Mr. Mousseau believed on reasonable grounds that Mr. Johnson was approaching him to use the mop handle against him. Whether the mop handle was being used in response to a robbery or threats by Mr. Mousseau matters not. In my view, the Crown has not disproved the first element of self-defence beyond a reasonable doubt, and indeed the Crown acknowledged that if Mr. Mousseau was attacked by Mr. Johnson with a pole, stick or mop, the Crown did not disprove the first prong of the inquiry under the s. 34(1) test.



 b)

Did Mr. Mousseau act for a defensive purpose? (s. 34(1)(b))
 
The second inquiry is what the Supreme Court of Canada refers to as “the motive”. It considers the accused’s personal purpose in committing the act that constitutes the offence. It is a subjective inquiry which goes to the root of self-defence. If there is no defensive or protective purpose, the rationale for the defence disappears. (See Khill, at para. 59)
 
In my view, the Crown has failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Mousseau did not have the subjective purpose in mind of defending or protecting himself. The second inquiry is a purely subjective one. In this case, I considered whether Mr. Mousseau subjectively had another motive for stabbing Mr. Johnson, other than protection or defending himself. 
As stated earlier, I accept that Mr. Mousseau’s testimony raises a reasonable doubt regarding the version of events and accordingly, the Crown has not disproven the second inquiry of the s. 34(1) analysis.



 c)

 The response – was Mr. Mousseau’s conduct reasonable in the circumstances? (s. 34(1)(c))
 
The third inquiry under s. 34(1) considers the accused’s response to the use or threat of force and requires that the act committed be reasonable in the circumstances. While the first two inquiries address the belief and the subjective purpose of the accused, the reasonableness inquiry under s. 34(1)(c) is primarily concerned with the reasonableness of the accused’s actions, not the accused’s mental state. As pointed out by the Supreme Court of Canada in Khill, at para. 62: 62

 … By grounding the law of self-defence in the conduct expected of a reasonable person in the circumstances, an appropriate balance is achieved between respecting the security of the person who acts and security of the person acted upon. The law of self-defence might otherwise "encourage hot-headedness and unnecessary resorts to violent self-help"
 
 
 
Section 34(2) of the Code, provides guidance and structure regarding how a decision-maker ought to determine whether an act of self-defence was reasonable in the circumstances.
 
It is important to note that the wording of s. 34(2) is mandatory as it states that in determining whether the act committed is reasonable the court shall consider the relevant circumstances of the person, the other parties and the act, including, but not limited to the following factors: (a) the nature of the force or threat; (b) the extent to which the use of force was imminent and whether there were other means available to respond to the potential use of force; (c) the person’s role in the incident; (d) whether any party to the incident used or threatened to use a weapon; (e) the size, age, gender and physical capabilities of the parties to the incident; (f) the nature, duration and history of any relationship between the parties to the incident, including any prior use or threat of force and the nature of that force or threat; (f.1) any history of interaction or communication between the parties to the incident; (g) nature and proportionality of the person’s response to the use or threat of force; and (h) whether the act committed was in response to a use or threat of force that the person knew was lawful.
 
 
 
It is clear that the factors are not an exhaustive list as the court is required to consider the relevant circumstances of the person, the other parties and the act including, but not limited to the enumerated factors.
 
I will now review the factors and other relevant circumstances in s. 34(2) in more detail. The nature of the force or threat (s. 34(2)(a))
 
The evidence of Mr. Mousseau is that Mr. Johnson struck him in the head with an object he initially described as a pole or stick and after seeing the relevant photographs produced by the Crown testified that it was a mop handle. 
His testimony was that Mr. Johnson hit him once, he fell back towards the kitchen sink and then saw Mr. Johnson advancing towards him armed with the mop handle and ready to strike him. Mr. Mousseau had already been hit in the forehead once and it was reasonable for him to believe that Mr. Johnson may have intended to strike him again. While I agree that a strike to his head was capable of causing a significant injury, the real question is whether the threat in this case justified a lethal stab to the chest with a machete or large hunting knife in order to escape the force or threat. The extent to which the use of force was imminent and whether there were other means available to respond to the potential use of force (s. 34(2)(b))
 
As stated earlier, Mr. Mousseau’s evidence raises a reasonable doubt in my mind as to exactly what transpired. If his evidence is accepted, Mr. Johnson was coming towards him with the mop handle over his head and he believed Mr. Johnson would strike him again. Fearing this second strike, Mr. Mousseau immediately pulled out a hunting knife and lunged towards Mr. Johnson, striking him in the chest.
 
While the use of force by Mr. Johnson was imminent, I am satisfied that there were other means available to respond to the potential use of force in this case. Mr. Mousseau could have called for help as there were others within earshot of the incident. He could have spoken to or shouted at Mr. Johnson and asked him what he was doing? Or directed him to stop or warned him that he had a knife. He could have brandished his knife and threatened to use it or demanded Mr. Johnson to stay back or he would use it. He could have retreated into the living room and/or yelled for someone to call the police or 911. Lastly, Mr. Mousseau was approximately six inches taller than Mr. Johnson, and weighed approximately the same amount at the time. He may have been able to avoid the second blow and tackle Mr. Johnson. Instead of taking any evasive action whatsoever, Mr. Mousseau reached for his hunting knife, lunged at Mr. Johnson and stabbed him in the chest. There is no evidence that he gave a warning, verbal or by brandishing the knife and showing it to Mr. Johnson. I agree with the position of the Crown that this was not a reasonable response by Mr. Mousseau on an objective basis. The person’s role in the incident (s. 34(2)(c))
 
The evidence is that Mr. Mousseau and Mr. Johnson did not know each other, spoke no words to each other during the altercation and had no quarrel with each other until Mr. Johnson returned to the kitchen after removing at least one of the bikes. I do not accept Mr. Mousseau’s evidence that he was not angry with Ms. Kennedy. I accept that Mr. Mousseau was angry and used threatening language with Ms. Kennedy and Mr. Johnson. I accept the accused’s behaviour caused Ms. Kennedy to tell Mr. Johnson they should leave and at that point, Mr. Johnson commenced removing the bikes. It is reasonable to infer that Mr. Johnson, fearing that Mr. Mousseau may harm his partner, armed himself with the mop to prevent Mr. Mousseau from harming Ms. Kennedy or himself. Perhaps his preemptive strike was fueled by the drugs that he had consumed earlier in the evening. While Mr. Johnson bears some responsibility for being the aggressor, Mr. Mousseau was angry and threatening and in my view, he bears some responsibility for the altercation escalating. 
Once the altercation unfolded Mr. Mousseau used excessive force by stabbing Mr. Johnson. Whether any party to the incident used or threatened to use a weapon (s. 34(2)(d))
 
Some of these factors overlap. Arguably, both parties used a weapon. Mr. Johnson used a pole, stick or a mop handle to strike Mr. Mousseau in the forehead, which resulted in a contusion. Mr. Mousseau did not bleed and did not seek medical attention. Mr. Mousseau stated on a number of occasions that he “feared for his life” and therefore immediately pulled out a large hunting knife and lunged towards Mr. Johnson, striking him in the chest. Although it is not clear, it appears that the stabbing occurred before Mr. Johnson attempted to swing or hit Mr. Mousseau a second time.
 
As I stated earlier, Mr. Mousseau pulled out his hunting knife and immediately thrusted it into Mr. Johnson’s chest with no thought of retreating, or backing away, or showing the knife and warning Mr. Johnson to back off, or yelling out to others who were close by to call the police or 911. I accept Mr. Mousseau’s evidence that Mr. Johnson posed a threat. 
However, Mr. Mousseau’s response was excessive and not reasonable in the circumstances. The size, age, gender and physical capabilities of the parties to the incident (s. 34(2)(e))
 
Mr. Mousseau was six inches taller than Mr. Johnson, although both parties weighed roughly the same amount. Mr. Johnson was 37 years of age and judging from the autopsy photographs appeared to be in good shape. Mr. Mousseau was 22 at the time and thinner than the size he was in court. There is no evidence to suggest that either of the parties had physical capabilities that were superior to the other. Both Mr. Mousseau and Mr. Johnson were intoxicated to a certain extent and therefore their reaction times may have been adversely affected. As well, their decision-making was probably impaired. The nature, duration and history of any relationship between the parties to the incident, including any prior use or threat of force and the nature of that force or threat (s. 34(2)(f)) Any history of interaction or communication between the parties to the incident (s. 34(2)(f.1))
 
Both of these factors relate to the history between the parties. 
The evidence is that Mr. Mousseau and Mr. Johnson did not know each other and did not speak or interact at all during the incident. Their only interaction occurred when Mr. Johnson hit Mr. Mousseau with a mop handle and then Mr. Mousseau brandished the knife and fatally stabbed Mr. Johnson. Neither of these factors assist in the reasonableness inquiry. That said, it is difficult to understand why Mr. Mousseau did not take other steps, evasive measures or at the very least, yell out a warning to Mr. Johnson before fatally stabbing him. 
You would think that as someone is approaching you with a mop handle there would be some communication, warning, swearing or simply telling the person to back off. None of evidence supports that happened.
 
The nature and proportionality of the person’s response to the use or threat of force (s. 34(2)(g))
 
I do not accept the position of the defence, that the response by Mr. Mousseau was proportional in the circumstances. His first choice, rather than any other evasive action as mentioned above, was to move towards Mr. Johnson, lunge with the hunting knife using “not an insignificant amount of force” as described by Dr. Morin to fatally stab Mr. Johnson. While I accept that Mr. Mousseau had received a blow to the head, the force he used and his response was far more than was reasonably necessary to defend himself.
 
Mr. Mousseau relies upon two decisions, P.S., at paras. 273 and 291, and R. v. Sangha, 2020 BCSC 1963, B.C.J. No. 2046, at para. 43. In P.S., the court was satisfied that the accused had good reason to think that his attackers meant to continue beating him. They had the accused outnumbered two to one, and were both much larger and stronger than he was. The accused was in a remote rural area where there was little realistic prospect of anyone coming to his aide. The court found that a reasonable person in the position of P.S. would have had good reason to fear that the attack might continue indefinitely if nothing happened to stop it and that he might be about to find himself hurt very badly. (See para. 273) In P.S., the court referenced the Khill decision stating “the accused was not required to weigh to a nicety the amount of force used under the rubric of proportionality”. (See para. 291) In my view, the facts in P.S. are distinguishable from the facts of this case. Mr. Mousseau was not outnumbered, it was Mr. Mousseau and Mr. Johnson and there is no evidence that Mr. Johnson was stronger or had special or superior fighting skills compared to Mr. Mousseau. There were other more proportional steps he ought reasonably to have considered as noted above. 
As well, there were many other people present within earshot who could have assisted if Mr. Mousseau called out to them for help or to call the police.
 
Similarly, the facts in the Sangha case are distinguishable. In that case, the accused stabbed a very aggressive and intoxicated assailant who challenged the accused. The court accepted the explanation given by the accused that they were in a dark street and that he was frightened, suffered from a back injury and faced a fast developing altercation with a drunken stranger. The accused saw the deceased reach inside his jacket which he perceived was reaching for a weapon and the accused pulled his folding knife from his pants pocket and stabbed the attacker. I note as well in the Sangha case that when the accused produced his knife, he held it in front of him and told the deceased to “stay away” which was evidence that he was using the knife to defend himself. The court found that the accused’s actions were reasonable in the circumstances. The accused had reason to fear for his life and made a split-second decision to defend himself by producing a knife for defensive purposes. (See para. 71)
 
Unlike the facts in the Sangha case, I am not satisfied that the use of force by Mr. Mousseau was reasonable to achieve a defensive purpose. He gave no warning, did not cry out for help and instead pulled out a hunting knife to inflict a fatal stab wound.
 
Whether the act committed was in response to a use or threat of force that the person knew was lawful (s. 34(2)(h))
 
I agree with the parties that this factor does not apply in this case.
 
To conclude on this third inquiry in Khill, the Supreme Court of Canada emphasized that the reasonableness inquiry under s. 34(1)(c) operates to ensure that the law of self-defence conforms to community norms of conduct. By grounding the law of self-defence and the conduct expected of a reasonable person in the circumstances, an appropriate balance is achieved between respecting the security of the person who acts and security of the person acted upon. The law of self-defence might otherwise “encourage hot-headedness and unnecessary resorts to violent self-help”. (See Khill, at para. 62)
 
In balancing all of the factors, the evidence proves beyond a reasonable doubt that a reasonable person in Mr. Mousseau’s position would not have responded immediately as he did by brandishing the knife and stabbing Mr. Johnson in the chest in the manner he did. While I agree that the altercation escalated quickly, and Mr. Mousseau may have feared for his safety, his response was not reasonable or proportionate. As stated earlier, he had numerous other steps that he could have taken that in my view a reasonable person would have considered in the circumstances. At the very least, Mr. Mousseau ought to have warned Mr. Johnson that he intended to use the knife if he continued to progress towards him. Calling for help combined with retreating into the living room were also reasonable responses.
 
In my view, the Crown has met the burden of disproving that Mr. Mousseau’s use of force was reasonable in all of the circumstances.
 
Accordingly, I find Mr. Mousseau guilty of culpable homicide. Did Mr. Mousseau have the requisite intent to commit murder – s. 229(a)(i)(ii)?
 
I accept that the Crown has disproven the third element of self-defence because Mr. Mousseau’s actions were not reasonable in the circumstances. The third thing the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt is that Mr. Mousseau had the requisite state of mind to commit second degree murder.
 
I must consider whether Mr. Mousseau meant to cause Mr. Johnson’s death or whether he meant to cause him bodily harm that he knew was likely to cause his death and was reckless whether death ensued or not.
 
While I have not accepted that Mr. Mousseau’s response was reasonable, I do accept his evidence that he did not intend to cause Mr. Johnson’s death. While his response was unreasonable, I am satisfied his actions were undertaken for a defensive purpose.
 
If I accepted the evidence of Ms. Kennedy, that it was Mr. Mousseau who was acting with belligerence and aggressiveness, attempting to rob them and then without provocation stabbed Mr. Johnson, the Crown submits that the court should have no difficulty finding that Mr. Mousseau stabbed Mr. Johnson with the intent to kill him, or at the very least, intended to cause him bodily harm, knowing that death would be the likely result and was reckless as to whether the death would ensue. As stated earlier, the evidence of Ms. Kennedy must be viewed with caution and her description of how the altercation unfolded simply lacks credibility and does not make sense. According to her, there was no dispute between Mr. Mousseau and Mr. Johnson. The dispute was only with her. Notwithstanding that, Mr. Mousseau went to his room to retrieve his knife and then came into the kitchen and unexpectedly stabbed Mr. Johnson without any provocation whatsoever. The description provided by Ms. Kennedy is simply not believable.
 
Further, the Crown submits that the post-offence conduct of Mr. Mousseau of immediately leaving showed a complete lack of remorse and is more consistent with someone who inflicted deadly harm, not someone who was shocked or afraid.
 
The post-offence conduct is circumstantial evidence which in my view does very little to support the Crown’s case. A simple explanation for his conduct is that in the heat of the moment he reacted to the provocation of Mr. Johnson and stabbed him. He knew his actions had caused bodily harm to Mr. Johnson as he crumpled to the floor bleeding. His explanation was that he was afraid and panicked is believable in the circumstances. He also knew he was probably in trouble and chose to flee. A decision he no doubt regrets. In fact, he testified that he did not mean to kill Mr. Johnson, expressed remorse and apologized for his conduct.
 
Once he was arrested, Mr. Mousseau had the right to remain silent and the fact that he did so cannot be used against him as evidence of intent to commit murder.
 
The Crown admits that if I accept all or even some of Mr. Mousseau’s evidence then proof of intent becomes more difficult. I agree. As I have explained earlier the evidence raises a reasonable doubt as to how the altercation unfolded and I accept that the Crown has failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Johnson was not the aggressor and that he was not approaching Mr. Mousseau with the mop handle ready to strike when Mr. Mousseau reacted and stabbed Mr. Johnson. I find that Mr. Mousseau believed on reasonable grounds that force was used and was threatened to be used against him by Mr. Johnson and Mr. Mousseau’s motive was for the purpose of defending or protecting himself. While I find that Mr. Mousseau commited culpable homicide on the basis that his actions were not reasonable, a review of all of the facts do not prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Mousseau had the intent for murder. I accept his evidence that he did not intend to cause Mr. Johnson’s death but wanted to defend himself and prevent Mr. Johnson from potentially striking him with the mop handle a second time. In my view, a review of all of the evidence and Mr. Mousseau’s testimony satisfies me that there is a reasonable doubt on the issue of the intent to commit second degree murder. Accordingly, I must find Mr. Mousseau not guilty of second degree murder, but guilty of the included offence of manslaughter. Provocation
 
Given my finding regarding intent, it is unnecessary to consider whether the partial defence of provocation applies in this case. It is only if I am wrong on the finding regarding intent for second degree murder, that it is necessary to consider the partial defence of provocation.
 
Provocation is the only defence which is exclusive to homicide. The legal requirements for the partial defence of provocation are set out in s. 232 of the Code. The four prerequisites are: i)




A wrongful act or insult; ii)


 
That the wrongful act or insult be sufficient to deprive an ordinary person of the power of self-control (objective element); iii)


 
The provocation must have caused the accused to lose self-control and act while out of control in response to the wrongful act or insult (subjective element); and iv)



That the accused acted on the sudden and before there was time for the accused’s passion to cool. (See R. v. Tran, 2010 SCC 58, [2010] 3 S.C.R. 350)
 
Whether Mr. Johnson’s wrongful act or insult amounted to provocation and whether Mr. Mousseau was deprived of the power of self-control by the provocation that he alleges he received are questions of fact that must be decided by the court. The onus is on the Crown to disprove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Mousseau’s culpable homicide is not reduced to manslaughter by the partial defence of provocation.
 
The Crown acknowledged that it would be “hard pressed to make a meaningful argument on provocation” if the court accepted the accused’s version of events in some fashion and found that Mr. Mousseau had the intent for murder. The Crown asked to revisit the issue of provocation before the court delivers its final decision in this case.
 
The defence made a limited submission regarding provocation and stated that while the defence of provocation may be independently available “without knowing the factual findings of the court it is difficult to imagine that the defence would not have been given due consideration as part of the assessment of the requisite intent for murder required under s. 229 of the Criminal Code.”
 
In light of the request made by the Crown and the limited submission received from the defence, I will not provide a decision on the defence of provocation at this time. As requested, I will grant the request from the Crown and defence to be given an opportunity to review this decision and file further written submissions on this issue if they wish to do so. Timelines for the delivery of written submissions, if the parties chose to file further submissions, will be set at the time of delivery of the reasons for decision. Conclusion
 
To conclude, I find as follows:
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/mb/kb/2023mbkb2.html
 
 
The events in this case took place in Thompson, Manitoba.
 
 
The accused, Cst. Jeremiah Dumont-Fontaine, is a member of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police ("RCMP"). On June 5, 2019, at around 6 p.m., Cst. Dumont-Fontaine attended the Thompson Inn bar in response to a report by bar staff that the complainant, Brian Halcrow, was causing a disturbance, including by attempting to force himself behind the bar and refusing to leave the premises.
 
 
In the course of removing Mr. Halcrow, and in the circumstances described below, Cst. Dumont-Fontaine delivered punches to Mr. Halcrow's head, resulting in injury, including a significant laceration to Mr. Halcrow's forehead requiring medical attention.
 
 
The Crown asks me to find Cst. Dumont-Fontaine guilty of assault causing bodily harm, pursuant to section 267(b) of the Criminal Code.
 
 
Constable Dumont-Fontaine says his conduct was justified under section 25 of the Criminal Code (protection of persons acting under authority) and/or he is not guilty of assault by virtue of section 34 of the Criminal Code (self-defence). II.
 WITNESSES
 
 
The Crown called: Nicole Moorehead, the Thompson Inn bar employee who called the RCMP; Sandra Moorehead, Nicole Moorehead's mother who was present at the bar when Cst. Dumont-Fontaine attended; Cst. Mark Sterdan, an RCMP officer who also responded to the call; Sarabjit (Scott) Kaler, an investigator with the Independent Investigation Unit of Manitoba (and former police officer); and, Sgt. Kelly Keith, a Use of Force expert engaged by the Independent Investigation Unit of Manitoba.
 
 
Mr. Halcrow did not testify as he died prior to trial (from causes unrelated to the alleged assault). Based on his audio statement to Mr. Kaler, Mr. Halcrow had no recollection of the incident.[1]
 
 
Constable Dumont-Fontaine testified in his own defence. He also called Cst. Jamie Harfield, an RCMP officer who attended the Thompson Inn bar approximately an hour and a half prior to the incident, as well as Sgt. Richard Pratch and Insp. Robert Bell, two RCMP Use of Force experts. Constable Dumont-Fontaine also filed, with the agreement of the Crown, a review opinion of Sgt. Pratch's report prepared by RCMP S/Sgt. Leonard McCoshen. Staff Sergeant McCoshen concurred with Sgt. Pratch's conclusions.
 
 
The Crown and Cst. Dumont-Fontaine relied on video evidence recorded by cameras inside and outside the Thompson Inn bar. There was no audio. III.
 LAW

The parties agree on the Criminal Code sections and case law to be considered in this case.

The Criminal Code sections are sections 25(1)(b), (3) and (4), and 34, more particularly: Protection of Persons Administering and Enforcing the Law Protection of persons acting under authority 25 (1) Every one who is required or authorized by law to do anything in the administration or enforcement of the law

 (b) as a peace officer or public officer, is, if he acts on reasonable grounds, justified in doing what he is required or authorized to do and in using as much force as is necessary for that purpose. When not protected (3) Subject to subsections (4) and (5), a person is not justified for the purposes of subsection (1) in using force that is intended or is likely to cause death or grievous bodily harm unless the person believes on reasonable grounds that it is necessary for the self-preservation of the person or the preservation of any one under that person's protection from death or grievous bodily harm. When protected (4) A peace officer, and every person lawfully assisting the peace officer, is justified in using force that is intended or is likely to cause death or grievous bodily harm to a person to be arrested, if

 (a) the peace officer is proceeding lawfully to arrest, with or without warrant, the person to be arrested;

 (b) the offence for which the person is to be arrested is one for which that person may be arrested without warrant;

 (c) the person to be arrested takes flight to avoid arrest;

 (d) the peace officer or other person using the force believes on reasonable grounds that the force is necessary for the purpose of protecting the peace officer, the person lawfully assisting the peace officer or any other person from imminent or future death or grievous bodily harm; and

 (e) the flight cannot be prevented by reasonable means in a less violent manner. Defence of Person Defence — use or threat of force 34 (1) A person is not guilty of an offence if

 (a) they believe on reasonable grounds that force is being used against them or another person or that a threat of force is being made against them or another person;

 (b) the act that constitutes the offence is committed for the purpose of defending or protecting themselves or the other person from that use or threat of force; and

 (c) the act committed is reasonable in the circumstances. Factors (2) In determining whether the act committed is reasonable in the circumstances, the court shall consider the relevant circumstances of the person, the other parties and the act, including, but not limited to, the following factors:

 (a) the nature of the force or threat;

 (b) the extent to which the use of force was imminent and whether there were other means available to respond to the potential use of force;

 (c) the person's role in the incident;

 (d) whether any party to the incident used or threatened to use a weapon;

 (e) the size, age, gender and physical capabilities of the parties to the incident;

 (f) the nature, duration and history of any relationship between the parties to the incident, including any prior use or threat of force and the nature of that force or threat;

 (f.1) any history of interaction or communication between the parties to the incident;

 (g) the nature and proportionality of the person's response to the use or threat of force; and

 (h) whether the act committed was in response to a use or threat of force that the person knew was lawful. No defence (3) Subsection (1) does not apply if the force is used or threatened by another person for the purpose of doing something that they are required or authorized by law to do in the administration or enforcement of the law, unless the person who commits the act that constitutes the offence believes on reasonable grounds that the other person is acting unlawfully.
 

As for the case law considering these provisions, counsel rely on R. v. Nasogaluak, 2010 SCC 6, 1 S.C.R. 206, R. v. Power, 2016 SKCA 29 (CanLII), and R. v. Letkeman, 2019 MBQB 124 (CanLII). The principles emerging from these cases can be summarized as follows: •

 
The Crown must prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, the essential elements of each charge are not justified under subsections 25(1)(b) and (3) or section 34 of the Criminal Code. 
See Letkeman at paras. 3–4. •

 
To determine whether the officer's conduct is justified, the court must consider: -
 
the accused's subjective perception of the risk they face when they used the force they did -
 
whether the accused's perception of this risk was reasonable -
 
whether the accused's response was more than reasonably necessary These last considerations are to be done on an objective basis, taking into account the nature of the threat, the overall circumstances, the force used in response to the threat, and the characteristics of the individuals involved. See Power at para. 35. •

 
Police engage in important, demanding and dangerous work that often requires quick reactions to emergencies. Their actions cannot be judged against a standard of perfection. See Nasogaluak at para. 35.

The phrase "grievous bodily harm" used in section 25 is not defined in the Criminal Code. 
The Supreme Court of Canada has ruled the phrase is not limited to describing harm or injury that is permanent or life-threatening; rather, it refers to harm or injury that is very severe or serious. See R. v. Paice, 2005 SCC 22, 1 S.C.R. 339 at para. 41.

Against this legal background, I turn to the facts. IV.
 FACTS

I will not simply summarize each witness's testimony. I will set out the material facts as I find them to be, identifying as I go those areas where I have preferred some evidence over other.[2]

As noted in the introduction, on June 5, 2019, at around 6 p.m., the RCMP received a report that a person at the Thompson Inn bar was causing a disturbance, including by attempting to force himself behind the bar and refusing to leave the premises. Constable Dumont‑Fontaine was on patrol at the time and attended the scene.

Upon arriving at the Thompson Inn, Cst. Dumont-Fontaine entered the bar through the Quartz Street doors and, while still very close to the entranceway, was met by Nicole Moorehead, the staff person who placed the call to the RCMP. While explaining the situation, Ms. Moorehead pointed to a nook, also near the Quartz Street entrance, where Mr. Halcrow was crouched. As Cst. Dumont-Fontaine was concluding his discussion with Ms. Moorehead, Mr. Halcrow stood himself up. Constable Dumont-Fontaine approached Mr. Halcrow at the nook. There were only four people in the bar at the time, not including Cst. Dumont-Fontaine and Mr. Halcrow.

Ms. Moorehead described Cst. Dumont-Fontaine's demeanour inside the bar as angry and upset. She testified Cst. Dumont-Fontaine was rough with Mr. Halcrow and placed him in handcuffs. Although Cst. Dumont-Fontaine admits inquiring of Ms. Moorehead whether the bar had served Mr. Halcrow too much alcohol, Cst. Dumont‑Fontaine denies being angry or dealing with Mr. Halcrow in the manner alleged. Despite the absence of an audio recording, it is clear from the video evidence and other credible witnesses that at no point while Cst. Dumont-Fontaine was in the bar did he interact physically with Mr. Halcrow or place Mr. Halcrow in handcuffs. For this reason, coupled with other inconsistencies in Nicole Moorehead's evidence pertaining to events earlier in the afternoon, I find Ms. Moorehead's evidence unreliable and, insofar as events in the bar are concerned, I prefer the evidence of Cst. Dumont-Fontaine and his colleague, Cst. Sterdan. I now turn to that evidence.

In response to Cst. Dumont-Fontaine's initial approach and inquiries, Mr. Halcrow took his hands from his pockets and told Cst. Dumont-Fontaine, "Don't fuckin' touch me." 
There is no dispute Mr. Halcrow was intoxicated. Despite intoxication and repetition of the phrase, "Don't fuckin' touch me", Mr. Halcrow acceded to Cst. Dumont-Fontaine's suggestion the two of them exit the bar. Constable Dumont-Fontaine described Mr. Halcrow's physical conduct at that moment as matter-of-fact and non-aggressive. 
Constable Dumont-Fontaine saw no need to search, cuff, or arrest Mr. Halcrow.

Constable Sterdan arrived at the scene just as or immediately before Cst. Dumont‑Fontaine and Mr. Halcrow were advancing towards the Quartz Street doors such that there was no reason for Cst. Sterdan to proceed beyond the nook. Instead he followed Cst. Dumont-Fontaine and Mr. Halcrow as they proceeded towards the exit doors. Neither Cst. Dumont-Fontaine nor Cst. Sterdan had had any prior encounters with Mr. Halcrow.

It was in the course of leaving the bar when the alleged assault occurred.

The Quartz Street entrance/exit is comprised of two sets of double doors with a small vestibule in between. The vestibule is divided by a railing, so that from the vantage point of a person exiting the bar, there is one passage lane to the right exterior door and one passage lane to the left exterior door. Each of the exterior doors is opened by pushing against a waist-high, horizontal bar.

As they walked towards the exit doors, Cst. Dumont-Fontaine and Mr. Halcrow were next to each other. Constable Dumont-Fontaine was to the right of the vestibule railing, heading towards the right exterior door. Mr. Halcrow was to the left of the vestibule railing, heading towards the left exterior door. Constable Sterdan was immediately behind Mr. Halcrow on the left. As he walked, Mr. Halcrow held a baseball cap in his left hand.

According to Cst. Dumont-Fontaine, as Mr. Halcrow approached the door, and to Cst. Dumont-Fontaine's surprise, Mr. Halcrow slammed his hands against the push bar to open it. The door did not open as anticipated, angering Mr. Halcrow somewhat as reflected in part by what Cst. Dumont-Fontaine described as an audible "Aargh". By the time the left door did open, Cst. Dumont-Fontaine had passed through the right door and pivoted left to face Mr. Halcrow as Mr. Halcrow was emerging from the left door. At that moment, Mr. Halcrow threw the baseball cap in Cst. Dumont-Fontaine's direction. The cap glanced off Cst. Dumont-Fontaine's face, ultimately landing close to Quartz Street, about fifteen feet away. In direct and immediate response to Mr. Halcrow throwing his cap, Cst. Dumont-Fontaine delivered a punch to Mr. Halcrow's face, followed by a second one. At trial, Cst. Dumont-Fontaine testified he does not think the second punch connected. After the second punch, Mr. Halcrow was taken to the ground by Cst. Dumont-Fontaine and Cst. Sterdan, handcuffed, arrested and charged for assaulting a police officer.

Constable Sterdan's version of the three men exiting the bar was similar to that of Cst. Dumont-Fontaine. However, from Cst. Sterdan's vantage point, he could not say whether it was a cap or Mr. Halcrow's hand that hit Cst. Dumont-Fontaine's face. When Cst. Sterdan was asked whether he believed the strikes were the best option in the circumstances, he said no. However, he qualified his answer by saying his perspective from behind Mr. Halcrow may have been different from Cst. Dumont-Fontaine's perspective from the front. Constable Sterdan testified he would have restrained Mr. Halcrow by grabbing him or used some other form of "soft physical control". Constable Sterdan also testified there simply was no time for him to act between the tossing of the cap and Cst. Dumont-Fontaine's punches. It all happened extremely quickly.

According to Cst. Dumont-Fontaine, the punches were justified in the circumstances. With some exceptions, his direct evidence relative to this point was consistent with his four-page formal written statement dated August 14, 2019 ("Statement"), prepared with the assistance of legal counsel at the request of the Independent Investigation Unit of Manitoba, amplified somewhat at trial.

Constable Dumont-Fontaine testified the situation was dynamic and his response was reflexive, though consistent with his training in the RCMP's Incident Management/Intervention Model. Constable Dumont-Fontaine perceived that the aggressive throwing of the cap by Mr. Halcrow, combined with the premise for Cst. Dumont-Fontaine attending the bar in the first place, the reputation of the Thompson Inn as a venue prone to fights, Mr. Halcrow's anger when the exit door did not open, Mr. Halcrow's size[3], the fact Mr. Halcrow was advancing towards Cst. Dumont-Fontaine once the door opened, Cst. Dumont-Fontaine's general work experiences and the possibility the cap throw was a distraction technique, amounted to assaultive behaviour justifying "hard physical control" in the form of punches. 
The second punch followed because, in Cst. Dumont‑Fontaine's assessment, the first did not destabilise Mr. Halcrow or sufficiently reduce the risk of assault.

Much of the Crown's cross-examination of Cst. Dumont-Fontaine was directed at undermining the reasonableness of Cst. Dumont-Fontaine's claim to have acted reflexively, the reasonableness of his conclusion Mr. Halcrow posed a significant risk, and the reasonableness of responding with two consecutive punches.

It was put to Cst. Dumont-Fontaine that numerous portions of the Statement suggest forethought on his part and are inconsistent with acting reflexively. According to the Crown, the following is but one example: I opened the other door and walked outside first while watching Mr. HALCROW. Behind Mr. HALCROW was Constable Mark STERDAN. My intention at this point was to speak with Mr. HALCROW and other witnesses to determine a course of action.
 
As the three of us walked outside, I turned around to speak with Mr. HALCROW who was standing maybe 3 feet away from me. Before I could say anything, Mr. HALCROW attacked me by aggressively removing his ball cap from his head and forcefully throwing it at my face at a high velocity while blading himself in a fighting stance. In my already heightened state of vigilance and believing that Mr. HALCROW's intention was to further assault me, I immediately engaged with Mr. HALCROW by throwing a right-handed strike at his face. I then quickly attempted to grab him and bring him to the ground but could feel Mr. HALCROW tense up and keep his feet underneath him. Believing that he was attempting to continue his confrontation with police, I delivered another strike at his face that caused him to assume a more submissive role by tucking his chin in and backing up. 
This gave me the opportunity to take him to the ground and safely arrest him for assaulting a police officer. [Statement, pages 2 to 3]
 

In response, Cst. Dumont-Fontaine testified that when he prepared the Statement, his intention was to describe not only what happened in the moment but also, with hindsight and in the context of the RCMP's Incident Management/Intervention Model, how and why things happened. The last six paragraphs of the Statement in particular go beyond a strict recital of events, introducing analysis of the situation consistent with his training.

As for Cst. Dumont-Fontaine's risk assessment, the Crown put to the constable that it was not reasonable given the Thompson Inn bar was close to empty, Cst. Dumont‑Fontaine saw no need to search or handcuff Mr. Halcrow while inside the bar, Mr. Halcrow listened to Cst. Dumont-Fontaine and agreed to leaving the bar, Mr. Halcrow was not armed, the item thrown at Cst. Dumont-Fontaine was merely a baseball cap, Cst. Sterdan was right behind Mr. Halcrow, there were no crowds outside the bar, and there existed a number of alternative, less physical ways to manage the situation. Specifically, in respect of the second punch, it was put to Cst. Dumont-Fontaine that the video showed Mr. Halcrow's head snapping back following the first blow, rendering a second one unnecessary.

Related, but separate, the Crown put to Cst. Dumont-Fontaine that between the incident and trial, Cst. Dumont-Fontaine embellished facts to justify the punches to Mr. Halcrow's head or diminish the severity of the blows. For example: · It was not until trial that Cst. Dumont-Fontaine stated the second punch may not have struck Mr. Halcrow at all. Both in his Statement and a report written closer to the event, Cst. Dumont-Fontaine reported two punches. · It was not until writing the Statement that Cst. Dumont-Fontaine described Mr. Halcrow standing in a bladed stance[4]. The Crown put to Cst. Dumont‑Fontaine the bladed stance simply was Mr. Halcrow's resting position after throwing the baseball cap, not a pre‑assaultive threat. · It was not until writing the Statement that Cst. Dumont-Fontaine referenced his attempt between punches to grab Mr. Halcrow, whereupon Mr. Halcrow tensed up and remained steady on his feet. · It was not until trial that Cst. Dumont-Fontaine mentioned Mr. Halcrow sloughed off Cst. Dumont-Fontaine's hand from his shoulder following the first punch. · In a supplemental internal RCMP report prepared by Cst. Dumont-Fontaine, Cst. Dumont-Fontaine used the word "jab", which the Crown suggests was done to minimize the force used.

Constable Dumont-Fontaine stood by his evidence respecting his risk assessment and his response despite the Crown's alleged inconsistencies and despite admitting the possibility alternative, softer physical measures might also have resolved the situation. He maintained events happened over mere seconds, overall Mr. Halcrow's behaviour became assaultive, the situation was dynamic, and he acted reflexively, consistent with his training.

Both the Crown and defence rely on experts opining as to the reasonableness of the force used by Cst. Dumont-Fontaine in the circumstances. The experts' qualifications were not challenged. With leave of the court, each expert, except for S/Sgt. McCoshen, attended during some or all of the trial.

Before addressing the expert evidence, I pause to make certain findings in respect of the Statement. As noted, the Crown submits the Statement is to be read as describing events as they happened on June 5, 2019, and the real-time conscious thinking of Cst. Dumont-Fontaine. 
In contrast, Cst. Dumont-Fontaine submits he prepared the Statement as an amalgam of a description of events as they happened and post-event analysis (or reflection) drawing from the RCMP's Incident Management/Intervention Model in accordance with his training. I find a fair reading of the Statement in the context of the evidence as a whole, including Insp. Bell's testimony about the intended use of the RCMP's Incident Management/Intervention Model and constable training, supports Cst. Dumont-Fontaine's characterization of the Statement. The fact the Statement was prepared with legal advice does not change my view, nor does the fact it is described (perhaps inaccurately) as a "statement". The document's title should not trump its content.

My characterization of Cst. Dumont-Fontaine's Statement materially impacts my assessment of Crown expert Sgt. Keith's opinion, which relies heavily thereon.

In lines 146 to 164 of Sgt. Keith's report, he notes an encounter involving a sudden, unanticipated attack at close proximity can result in an officer responding reflexively with force where they do not have the benefit of time, distance or forethought prior to the assault to choose what, in hindsight, might have been a more appropriate response. In those circumstances, the more forceful response may not be unreasonable (even if based on some erroneous assessments of facts). Despite this acknowledgment, Sgt. Keith rules out applying that scenario to Cst. Dumont-Fontaine based on his view Cst. Dumont‑Fontaine's Statement is proof positive of conscious anticipation. As evident from paragraph 35 of these reasons, my assessment of the Statement is opposite to Sgt. Keith's, significantly undermining the weight I give to his opinion that Cst. Dumont‑Fontaine's use of force was unreasonable.

Constable Dumont-Fontaine relies on expert evidence from Sgt. Pratch (as reviewed by S/Sgt. McCoshen) and the oral testimony of Insp. Bell at trial. They concluded the force used by Cst. Dumont-Fontaine against Mr. Halcrow was reasonable in all the circumstances and was consistent with RCMP training and policy. In the "Opinion" section of Sgt. Pratch's report, he notes, among other things: •

 
Cst. Dumont-Fontaine's risk assessment would have included factors leading up to the actual assaults, both mitigating and aggravating. However, no situation is ever routine. •

 
Despite having gained compliance from Mr. Halcrow, Mr. Halcrow's behaviour changed as he was exiting the bar, including when he threw his cap at Cst. Dumont-Fontaine. From the time Cst. Dumont-Fontaine turned to face Mr. Halcrow outside the bar to when Cst. Dumont-Fontaine threw his second punch, only two seconds had lapsed. In other words, Cst. Dumont-Fontaine had two seconds to determine/perceive there was a threat, try to protect himself, and try to neutralize the threat. •

 
The fact the throwing of the baseball cap was unprovoked is a material "threat cue" and a recognized distraction technique, which, in police experience, often is followed by some form of assaultive behaviour. A split-second decision was required. Where there is assaultive behaviour, a strike is one of the appropriate methods to control a subject. •

 
Once the threat was neutralized, Cst. Dumont-Fontaine stopped. •

 
The throwing of the baseball cap by Mr. Halcrow did raise tactical considerations as did the fact Mr. Halcrow was within the confines of a doorway.

During cross-examination, both Sgt. Pratch and Insp. Bell readily acknowledged other, less forceful measures might have been attempted to de-escalate Mr. Halcrow's conduct. However, they both maintained that the possibility a less forceful measure might have subdued Mr. Halcrow, or that another officer might have made a different choice, did not render Cst. Dumont-Fontaine's actions unreasonable. Both experts also rejected the Crown's suggestion their opinions were skewed towards the subjective assessment made by Cst. Dumont-Fontaine and failed to sufficiently address whether Cst. Dumont‑Fontaine's perception of the risk and the force used was objectively reasonable. The Crown also put to Sgt. Pratch and Insp. Bell that because they too are members of the RCMP, the objectivity and reliability of their assessments are questionable. In other words, the RCMP should not be investigating their own. V.

ANALYSIS

There is no contesting the Crown has established the essential elements of assault causing bodily harm. The question in this case is whether the Crown has established, beyond a reasonable doubt, Cst. Dumont-Fontaine's conduct was not justified under section 25 of the Criminal Code or did not constitute self-defence under section 34 of the Criminal Code. As such, I will consider the factors referenced by me in paragraph 12 of these reasons. A.

 
Accused's Subjective Perception

I am satisfied that, at the material time, Cst. Dumont-Fontaine subjectively perceived the throwing of the baseball cap by Mr. Halcrow combined with the surrounding circumstances gave rise to a level of risk justifying his punches. To me, this case turns on whether that perception and the force used also were objectively reasonable.[5] B.

 
Reasonableness of the Perception

During cross-examination and its submissions, the Crown, with considerable initial impact, systematically broke events down into individual fragments of time, suggesting there was no one act or moment, or combination thereof, that could give rise to a reasonable perception of risk. Despite the first blush effectiveness of the Crown's position, I fear subdividing the relatively short period of time into moments risks materially underestimating the risk presented to Cst. Dumont‑Fontaine. 
The Crown submits its position is bolstered by Cst. Sterdan's testimony he did not perceive the level of risk to be particularly high. However, I also must take into account that Cst. Sterdan qualified his answer by pointing out he and Cst. Dumont-Fontaine observed events from different vantage points. In other words, one officer's assessment may be different from another's.

Overall, I am left with reasonable doubt about whether Cst. Dumont-Fontaine's perception of the risk was objectively unreasonable.
 
C.

 
The Accused's Response

I share the Crown's concern that all of Cst. Dumont-Fontaine's use of force experts are also RCMP officers. The fact the RCMP is reviewing its own personnel undermines the objectivity (in reality and appearance) and hence credibility of the opinions. That said, I find the Crown's expert report also is flawed although for different reasons. 
As previously noted, in my view, Sgt. Keith relied on a mischaracterization of Cst. Dumont‑Fontaine's Statement. By relying heavily thereon, I have concerns about the accuracy of Sgt. Keith's conclusions such that reasonable doubt exists. Does that doubt disappear when I add in all the other evidence, including the video footage?

No. When I consider the overall circumstances, the nature of the force used, and the characteristics of Cst. Dumont-Fontaine,reasonable doubt remains as to whether Cst. Dumont-Fontaine's response was objectively unreasonable. Once again, the fact Cst. Sterdan reacted or perceived matters differently does not carry the day for the Crown. VI.
 CONCLUSION

To conclude, I find the Crown has not proved, beyond a reasonable doubt, the force applied against Mr. Halcrow was not justified under subsections 25(1)(b) and (3) and section 34 of the Criminal Code. The charge of assault causing bodily harm cannot stand.

My ruling should not be interpreted as approval of the force exercised by Cst. Dumont-Fontaine. 
My conclusion might well have been different had the onus of proof been a balance of probabilities rather than beyond a reasonable doubt.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/mb/kb/2023mbkb12.html
 
 
The accused was charged with sexual assault and sexual interference. On November 3, 2019, the date of the incident, the complainant was 14 and the accused was 20. They had never met before the incident. They both testified. 
 
 
The complainant admitted to being “extremely” intoxicated and described her condition as being in a “coma”. The complainant testified that the accused performed oral sex and vaginal sex upon her without consent. Her eyes were closed during the oral sex. The accused denied doing anything of a sexual nature with her. For reasons explained below, I find the accused not guilty. FACTS
 
 
The trial took place on December 5-6, 2022, in a “child-friendly” courtroom.
 
 
Jurisdiction and date of the offences were admitted. It was admitted that the accused was the person named in the Indictment.
 
 
Counsel agreed that the complainant was born in February 2005, and the accused was born in June 1999.
 
 
The complainant testified that she did not know the accused before November 3, 2019.
 
 
The complainant made a video statement to the police on 


December 3, 2019. She adopted the comments that she made in the statement, and the video was entered as an exhibit.
 
 
On November 3, 2019, the complainant and her friend (the “Friend”) obtained two bottles of Long Island Vodka and began drinking them. They walked to a McDonalds and spent some time inside. 
 
 
While in the McDonalds, the complainant encountered the accused. 
He began to “hit on” her. The Friend was present. In her police statement, the complainant said: “He was like hitting on us – well, like hitting on me. He was like calling me hot as I was walking past him. And then when I got to the table with my friends he like followed us around…”

In her statement, the complainant went on: “So me and my friends went outside and shared a smoke with him. He was like touching my waist and stuff, and I was like, ‘I’m 14.’ Like, ‘Stop.’ And he would like – kept like --- he’d come up behind me and like grab me and like hold me close to him. I’m like, ‘Stop.’ And my friends would be like, ‘Stop. She’s 14.’”

Later, the complainant left McDonalds with the Friend and went to the house where the alleged offences occurred (the “House”). Other friends and friends of friends were there, at least at first. At the trial, the complainant said that two of these people (whose names she did not know) were males. She did not remember much about their appearance. 

The complainant entered the basement of the House and lay down on a mattress. Referring to the accused, the complainant said: “I remember him like coming on top of me and like trying to kiss me and like, you know, like hold me and he was like holding me and stuff.”

The complainant continued: “And then that’s when I just passed out and I was like unconscious, but like I could still hear everything that was going on. It’s just I couldn’t open my eyes or like move.”

The complainant fell asleep and then woke up. She said: “And [the accused] was on top of me and then he was like – my pants were off and he was like on top of me having sex with me. And I was like – then like awake, he – he got off of me when I woke up.”

Later, the complainant explained how her pants were on when she passed out but, when she woke up, “My pants were off and they were beside the bed and so was my underwear too. They were with my pants.”

The complainant did not recall seeing a condom.

After the incident, the complainant did not go to a hospital. She did take certain “self-care” medications, to prevent HIV and pregnancy.

At trial, the complainant added some details that she did not give to police. She testified that the accused performed oral sex upon her. Her eyes were closed at the time, but she testified that it was the accused.

At trial, the complainant described her state at the time of the incident. She described herself as “extremely” drunk. She said she felt like she was in a “coma”. She said she vomited. She said she was too drunk to stand.

The complainant has not seen the accused since the incident, other than in court. The disputed evidence

After the complainant testified, the Crown raised a specific issue. At that point, a voir dire was held. The Crown said that, when she was with the police, the complainant identified the accused’s photo from a police photo-pack. The Crown said that it would like to call a police officer to testify to that effect. Counsel agreed that defence was previously made aware of these events, so there was no disclosure problem. However, defence counsel objected to the Crown’s proposal.

Defence counsel argued that the Crown’s proposed evidence would be irrelevant. Furthermore, it would probably be hearsay - an officer would testify about things the complainant said in order to establish the truth of those things. Finally, it would amount to improper oath-helping.

Defence counsel candidly explained that, in closing argument, he would argue that the complainant was not a reliable witness. The issue would be reliability, not credibility.

The Crown filed a copy of R. v. Santhosh, 2016 ONCA 731 (“Santhosh”). At paragraphs 33-37, the court explained the rule against oath-helping. At paragraph 33, the court quoted with approval from the Supreme Court of Canada’s decision in R. v. B. (F.F.), 1993 CanLII 167 (SCC), 1 S.C.R. 697, at p. 729: The rule against oath-helping prohibits a party from presenting evidence solely for the purpose of bolstering a witness’ credibility before that witness’ credibility is attacked. This type of evidence is of the sort that would tend to prove the truthfulness of the witness, rather than the truth of the witness’ statements.
 

In Santhosh at paragraph 37, the court observed that, “a party can introduce oath-helping evidence to bolster the credibility of a witness whose credibility has been attacked.” The Crown sought to rely upon this principle to support its proposal.

I sustained defence counsel’s objection. The voir dire ended and the trial continued. Among other things, I concluded that the testimony of officers about what the complainant said to them while viewing the photo-pack would be hearsay.

Now, with the luxury of time, I can more fully explain the principles underlying my decision.

To begin with, any evidence that the complainant chose the accused’s photo from a photo-pack would be irrelevant. After the complainant spoke to the police, the accused was obviously arrested and charged. The complainant testified under oath at trial that it was the accused (who was personally present in the courtroom) who sexually assaulted her. The apparent fact that, three years earlier, while not under oath, she also identified the accused’s photo from a photo-pack would add nothing to the evidence.

The Crown did not question the complainant about the photo-pack. 
Any testimony from a police officer about what the complainant said or did while viewing the photo-pack would not be the best evidence.

Furthermore, although counsel did not discuss the principle of “prior consistent statements”, that is essentially what the Crown was driving at. At trial, the complainant said that the accused sexually assaulted her. Apparently, about three years before the trial, the complainant essentially said the same thing to a police officer with a photo-pack. The complainant made a “prior consistent statement”. In R. v. Stirling, 2008 SCC 10, at paragraph 5, the Supreme Court of Canada pointed out that it “is well established that prior consistent statements are generally inadmissible.” The Manitoba Court of Appeal reiterated this point in R. v. Kemash, 2009 MBCA 15 at paragraph 35.

Finally, as I observe in paragraph 61 below, once the trial was over, it became clear that the dispute about the photo-pack was essentially academic. The accused

The accused testified. He denied doing or trying to do anything of a sexual nature with the complainant.

He agreed that he never met the complainant before the date in question and that he has never seen her since.

He agreed that he went to the McDonalds on the evening in question. He said he had consumed a little alcohol and a little marijuana. He agreed that he later walked to the House. He agreed that the complainant and a few other people, including a number of males, were also present. 

The accused explained that the House belonged to a female friend of his mother’s (“R”). He was staying there at the time. He stayed there for a few months. The sister of the accused (the “Sister”) was present on the evening in question.

When the complainant, the Sister and their friends or friends of friends arrived at the House, the accused was waiting to be picked up by his friend, who had a vehicle. He knew that R did not want people in her house. Therefore, the accused told the Sister to make sure that her friends left.

If the complainant vomited that evening, it was not in the presence of the accused.

The accused’s friend picked him up and they left. The accused did not return until early the next morning. By then, everyone was gone.

The accused remembered attending a police station and speaking with the police. If the accused made a recorded statement to the police, the Crown did not use it to impeach him. CRIMINAL CODE (the “Code”) AND CASE LAW

R. v. W.(D.), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), (“W.(D.)”) was a sexual assault trial in which the accused testified. The court outlined a useful approach for analyzing the credibility of an accused and the principle of reasonable doubt. At page 758, the majority set out the framework for instructing a jury: First, if you believe the evidence of the accused, obviously you must acquit.
 
Second, if you do not believe the testimony of the accused but you are left in reasonable doubt by it, you must acquit.
 
Third, even if you are not left in doubt by the evidence of the accused, you must ask yourself whether, on the basis of the evidence which you do accept, you are convinced beyond a reasonable doubt by that evidence of the guilt of the accused.
 

Later cases have elaborated upon W.(D.). R. v. Menow, 2013 MBCA 72, was also a sexual assault case involving a W.(D.) analysis.
At the appeal stage, the accused argued that the trial judge had erred by considering the evidence of the complainant and of a witness in concluding that the accused was not credible. At paragraph 23, the appeal court observed: 
To assess the evidence of the accused in a vacuum ignores the fact that the whole purpose of the trial is to determine whether or not the accused is guilty…It is impossible for an accused’s evidence to be considered without a factual or contextual backdrop for the charge itself. 
 

In R. v. Vuradin, 2013 2 SCC 38, the court considered the W.(D.) framework. At paragraph 21, the court pointed out: 
The order in which a trial judge makes credibility findings of witnesses is inconsequential as long as the principle of reasonable doubt remains the central consideration.
 

Relevant provisions of the Criminal Code, RSC 1985, c. C-46 (the “Code”) include: Mistake of age
 
150.1 (4) It is not a defence to a charge under section 151 or 152, subsection 160(3) or 173(2), or section 271, 272 or 273 that the accused believed that the complainant was 16 years of age or more at the time the offence is alleged to have been committed unless the accused took all reasonable steps to ascertain the age of the complainant.
 
Sexual interference
 
151 Every person who, for a sexual purpose, touches, directly or indirectly, with a part of the body or with an object, any part of the body of a person under the age of 16 years
 
(a) is guilty of an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than 14 years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of one year; or 
 
(b) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction and is liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than two years less a day and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of 90 days.
 
Assault
 
265 (1) A person commits an assault when
 
(a) without the consent of another person, he applies force intentionally to that other person, directly or indirectly;
 
(b) he attempts or threatens, by an act or a gesture, to apply force to another person, if he has, or causes that other person to believe on reasonable grounds that he has, present ability to effect his purpose; or
 
(c) while openly wearing or carrying a weapon or an imitation thereof, he accosts or impedes another person or begs.
 
Application
 
(2) This section applies to all forms of assault, including sexual assault, sexual assault with a weapon, threats to a third party or causing bodily harm and aggravated sexual assault.
 
ARGUMENT

Both counsel referred to W.(D.).

Defence counsel agreed that, if the complainant’s version of events was accurate, sexual assault and sexual interference occurred.

Defence counsel argued that the accused was both credible and reliable and that his evidence raised a reasonable doubt about his guilt. Defence counsel argued that a crucial issue was the reliability of the complainant. She was so drunk that her evidence was unreliable. She testified that two other males were present at about the time of the incident in question. Given the coma-like state of the complainant, it is possible that one of the two males sexually assaulted her. 

Defence counsel also pointed out that, during the alleged oral sex, the complainant’s eyes were closed. If the oral sex occurred, there must be some reasonable doubt that the accused was the party involved. 

The complainant did testify that she opened her eyes and saw the accused on top of her, having sex with her. However, again, the extreme intoxication of the complainant raises a reasonable doubt.

The Crown argued that the accused was not credible, and that none of the evidence raised a reasonable doubt about his guilt. FINDINGS

There was no dispute about the age of the complainant. There is no doubt that, if her version of events was completely accurate, sexual assault and sexual interference occurred.



Counsel agreed that W.(D.) and the W.(D.) line of cases applied. Looking at the first leg of W.(D.), I am not certain whether or not I believed the accused. My uncertainty in itself suggests at least some reasonable doubt, and the need for acquittal.

In the event that I have erred, I will look at the second leg of W.(D.). 
The evidence of the accused did raise a reasonable doubt about his guilt. The accused was not evasive. Although I am aware of the limits of considering witness demeanour, his demeanour, body language and tone of voice did not suggest any sort of deceit. Although he was not an eloquent speaker, his testimony was internally consistent. 

In the event that I have erred, the evidence as a whole raised a reasonable doubt about the guilt of the accused. 

To begin with, the complainant told the police that the accused touched her waist and grabbed her from behind and held her close, in front of witnesses at McDonalds. The Crown called no witnesses to testify. The accused denied these allegations.

The complainant admitted that she was “extremely” intoxicated when the alleged events happened. She went so far as to describe her condition as being like a “coma”. She admitted that two unnamed boys were present at roughly the time that the alleged sexual assault occurred. Those facts in themselves have to raise at least a reasonable doubt about the guilt of the accused. 

Defence counsel argued that the main issue is not the complainant’s honesty, but her reliability. Indeed, defence counsel conceded that a sexual assault likely happened on the day in question. However, two males other than the accused were present. 

 In other words, it is not necessary to conclude that the complainant deliberately concocted a story about the accused sexually assaulting her. It is enough to conclude that the complainant was so drunk that she cannot reliably say that it was the accused (as opposed to one of the other males) who sexually assaulted her. If the court can reach that conclusion, there must be a reasonable doubt, and acquittal is required.

I agree with defence counsel. The complainant was so drunk that her testimony about the crucial facts was not reliable. If she was sexually assaulted, there is a reasonable doubt that it was the accused who assaulted her. Therefore, I must acquit the accused on both charges.

I am aware that the accused admitted that he had consumed a little alcohol and a little marijuana on the evening in question. However, that admission is far removed from being extremely drunk or being in a coma-like state.

The accused was unshaken on the crucial issue. He denied doing or trying to do anything of a sexual nature with the complainant. The fact that he consumed small amounts of alcohol and marijuana did not make him any less credible or reliable on this crucial issue.

Incidentally, even if counsel had agreed as an agreed fact that the complainant picked out the accused’s photo from a police photo-pack, my final conclusions would likely have been the same. At some point before the trial, the accused was obviously arrested and charged. The essential problem for the Crown’s case would have been exactly the same – the complainant was so drunk that her extreme intoxication created a reasonable doubt about the accused’s guilt. In a sense, the issue of the photo-pack was academic.

For all of these reasons, I find the accused not guilty on all charges.

I thank counsel for their courtesy and cooperation.
./canlii_crim_corpus/html/2023/mb/kb/2023mbkb1.html
 
 
A.K.B. was convicted by a jury of second degree murder in the killing of his mother, L.D. He was five-and-a-half weeks shy of his seventeenth birthday at the time of the offence.
 
 
L.D. was beaten to death in her bed with a weapon, such as a baseball bat or crowbar.
 
 
The Crown makes an application pursuant to section 64 of the Youth Criminal Justice Act ("YCJA") for an order seeking an adult sentence, as the maximum sentence available under the YCJA is not sufficient. For the Crown to succeed in its application to have an adult sentence imposed, (a) it must rebut the presumption of A.K.B.'s diminished moral blameworthiness, and if the Crown is successful in doing so, (b) it must satisfy me that the sanctions that can be imposed under the YCJA are inadequate to hold A.K.B. accountable for the murder. See R. v. D.B., 2008 SCC 25, 2 S.C.R. 3 at paras. 92–93.
 
 
The defence says A.K.B. should be sentenced as a youth. A.K.B. was sixteen years old at the time of the offence, has no prior criminal record, has no history of violence, and was by all accounts a normal teenager who was dependent on his parents. The defence says the Crown has not rebutted the presumption of diminished moral blameworthiness. If I am satisfied the Crown has rebutted the presumption, the defence says a sentence under the YCJA is sufficient. II.
 FACTS
 
 
A.K.B. was convicted by a jury of second degree murder. As such, I must determine the facts upon which A.K.B. is to be sentenced.
 
 
Section 724(2) of the Criminal Code provides: Jury (2)
 Where the court is composed of a judge and jury, the court


 (a)
shall accept as proven all facts, express or implied, that are essential to the jury's verdict of guilty; and



 (b) may find any other relevant fact that was disclosed by evidence at the trial to be proven, or hear evidence presented by either party with respect to that fact.
 
 
In determining the facts upon which A.K.B. is to be sentenced, I am bound by the express and implied factual implications of the jury's verdict and I must not accept as fact any evidence consistent only with a verdict rejected by the jury. See R. v. Brown, 1991 CanLII 73 (SCC), 2 S.C.R. 518 at 523; R. v. Braun, 1995 CanLII 16075 (MB CA), M.J. No. 723 (QL) at para. 30 (C.A.).
 
 
In my view, the conviction of second degree murder was based on the jury's conclusion that, although A.K.B. formed the intention to kill his mother, they were not satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt he had planned and deliberated over the killing.
 
 
Given that A.K.B. and L.D. were the only people in the house prior to the murder, there is no direct evidence of what occurred prior to the killing.
 
Sometime before 9 a.m. on March 26, 2019, A.K.B. beat his mother to death with a weapon, such as a baseball bat or crowbar. He struck her several times. There were thousands of blood spatter stains throughout L.D.'s bedroom—including on all four walls and the ceiling—as well as on the wall just outside her bedroom.
 
The autopsy showed the injuries to L.D.'s head and face were significant: bruises, tears, lacerations down to the bone, and visible brain matter. There were also injuries to L.D.'s right arm: bruises to the forearm and wrist and a compound fracture to the right wrist that would have been caused by a significant blow. 
The pathologist testified that those injuries would have occurred as L.D. put her arms up to protect her head. In other words, they were defensive injuries.
 
I cannot conclude with certainty that L.D. was asleep when the attack occurred. However, the murder occurred in the early morning, L.D. was found lying on the bed facing up, with her head at the top of the bed where the pillows are placed, she was wearing clothing one would sleep in, and she had very few defensive wounds. The blood spatter expert provided the opinion that, based on the bloodstain pattern in the room, L.D. did not leave the bed or that position during the attack.
 
After the killing, A.K.B. made efforts to clean up the scene. With the blood spatter stains located throughout the bedroom, there can be no doubt A.K.B. would have had blood on him. Clearly A.K.B. cleaned himself up before leaving the house that morning.
 
A.K.B. also poured bleach on L.D. There were significant bleach stains where L.D. was found lying on the bed, including in the area of her head.
 
A.K.B. went out to the driveway just after 9 a.m. and changed the cabin air filter in the car. He then took the family dog by car to the dog day care centre. He continued to the St. Vital Centre shopping mall, and then Walmart and Canadian Tire at the Southdale Shopping Centre. From video surveillance at those locations, A.K.B. looked calm and normal while running errands.
 
Between 9:01 and 9:20 a.m., A.K.B. sent three text messages to his mother's cell phone about running some errands.
 
A.K.B. returned home at approximately 10:36 a.m. and called 9-1-1 at 10:43 a.m. In that call he said his mother was on the bed and there was blood all over her. He said she was sleeping when he left to take the dog to the dog day care centre. 
When asked if his mother had been having any problems with anyone, A.K.B. replied, "There's a guy at work that was bothering her and she transferred away because -- I don't know."
 
Police officers arrived on scene and found A.K.B. just inside the front door. A.K.B. was crying and holding a cell phone. He pointed the officers towards the bedroom.
 
The officers found L.D. lying face up in bed, unconscious and not breathing. All five officers testified that her face was badly beaten to the point of being unrecognizable.
 
Firefighters and paramedics arrived shortly after the police.
 
The house was very thoroughly searched over the course of the next nine days and no weapon was located in the house. A.K.B. could have put the weapon in the garbage bin at the house (which was picked up that morning) or could have disposed of it somewhere along the way of his errands. We will never know where he disposed of it.
 
In his statement to the police, A.K.B. recounted his errands of that morning—taking the dog to the dog day care centre and shopping. He told the officers a story that when he left the house, he thought his mother was still sleeping, and when he got home, the door was unlocked. He then noticed blood on her bedroom door and found her body. When asked if his mother had trouble with anyone, he again brought up the possibility of another suspect from her work (C.L.). III.
 THE LAW
 

The youth criminal justice system is intended to protect the public by holding young persons accountable by imposing sentences that are proportionate to the seriousness of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the young person, and by promoting the rehabilitation and reintegration of young persons who have committed offences.

For an adult sentence to be imposed on A.K.B., first the Crown must rebut the presumption of diminished moral blameworthiness ("the presumption"). The standard is neither proof beyond a reasonable doubt nor proof on a balance of probabilities. 
Rather, the standard is one of satisfaction after I carefully consider all the relevant factors. See R. v. A.O., 2007 ONCA 144 (CanLII).

Only if I am satisfied the Crown has rebutted the presumption do I go on to consider whether the Crown has demonstrated a youth sentence would not be sufficient to hold A.K.B. accountable for the crime.



 The Presumption of Diminished Moral Blameworthiness

In assessing whether the Crown has rebutted the presumption, I must consider both the circumstances of the offence and A.K.B.'s circumstances. "The presumption assumes that all young people start from a position of lesser maturity, moral sophistication and capacity for independent judgment than adults": R. v. M.W., 2017 ONCA 22 (CanLII) at para. 97.

I must be careful not to impose an onus on A.K.B. There is no onus upon him to establish he had the moral capacity of a youth. The presumption already exists.

The Crown and the defence provided several cases supporting their respective positions. There are similarities and distinguishing features in any case, but every case must be decided on its own facts and circumstances.

I must be cautious in considering cases prior to the Supreme Court of Canada's decision in D.B. in 2008. In that case, the Supreme Court of Canada upheld the Ontario Court of Appeal's decision (2006 CanLII 8871 (ON CA), O.J. No. 1112 (QL)) that a presumption of an adult sentence for certain offences was inconsistent with the principle of fundamental justice that young persons are entitled to the presumption of diminished moral culpability. The Supreme Court of Canada also set out the two-pronged test I must follow.

Subsequently in 2017, the Ontario Court of Appeal, in M.W., noted that a two‑pronged approach is important: … [U]ndertaking separate analyses of each prong is important. The two prongs address related but distinct questions and, although similar factors are applicable to both, there is not a complete overlap. It is not necessarily the case that every factor relevant to an assessment of whether a youth sentence would hold a young person accountable is relevant to the question of whether the Crown has rebutted the presumption. … [A]s closely connected as the two prongs -- the presumption and the issue of accountability -- are, there is a risk associated with considering the Crown's application to have the young person sentenced as an adult in a blended analysis in which the presumption and accountability are dealt with together. The risk is that a factor relevant only to one of the two prongs may be relied upon to support a finding in relation to the other.

I must also be careful in considering cases prior to the enactment of the Safe Streets and Communities Act, S.C. 2012, c. 1, wherein it states subsection 38(2) of the YCJA is amended by adding paragraph (f), which reads: (f) subject to paragraph (c), the sentence may have the following objectives:

(i) to denounce unlawful conduct, and 
(ii) to deter the young person from committing offences.
 
Prior to this, the objectives of denunciation and deterrence were not part of sentencing a young person under the YCJA.

Finally, I must be cautious in considering cases from outside Manitoba. As noted in section 38(2)(b) of the YCJA, "the sentence must be similar to the sentences imposed in the region on similar young persons found guilty of the same offence committed in similar circumstances" (emphasis added). R. v. K.(Cr.) and K.(Ct.), 2006 ONCJ 283 (CanLII)

This sentencing occurred before the Supreme Court of Canada's decision in D.B., but after the Ontario Court of Appeal declared a presumption of an adult sentence for murder to be unconstitutional. The onus was on the Crown to show the defendant young persons should be sentenced as adults; however, the two-pronged test had not yet been articulated. Instead, the sentencing judge approached the question of an adult sentence this way:
 The issue then becomes whether the blend of considerations — the aggravating and mitigating circumstances of the offence, age, background etc., and those considerations and principles in section 38 — are such as to render this case exceptional and to take it outside of the range where the youth sentence can hold the offender to account — again, importantly, keeping in mind that we are talking about "fair and proportionate accountability" that is consistent with the greater dependency of young persons and their reduced level of maturity.
 

The two young persons were convicted of first degree murder in the death of their mother. They were fifteen and sixteen years old at the time they drowned their mother, who was drunk and had consumed several Tylenol 3's that the young persons made available to her. The Court concluded that youth sentences were appropriate.

The mother was an alcoholic who neglected her daughters (the two young persons) in many ways. In the summer before the murder, the mother lost her job and was drinking heavily. The family's home life deteriorated severely.

The offence was premeditated to an extreme degree in that it was a plan that was months in the making. The two young persons had pre-planned a false alibi and cover‑up.

Both young persons were described as very intelligent and excelled at school prior to the murder. Neither had a criminal record or a history of anti-social behaviour. They had little guidance or positive parental influence and were largely left to develop their own value system. R. v. J.A.P., 2008 BCSC 1259 (CanLII)

This sentencing occurred shortly before the Supreme Court of Canada's decision in D.B.

J.A.P. was convicted of second degree murder in the shooting death of his mother. He was fourteen years old at the time of the offence. However, he was not arrested until seven years after the offence. 
The Court concluded that a youth sentence was appropriate.

J.A.P. was the product of a very dysfunctional family. His relationship with his mother seriously deteriorated when she returned to the family after a year away. On several occasions his mother became physically abusive towards him, and she exposed herself to him while making demeaning comments about him.

The pre-sentence report did not disclose any psychological disorder, and noted J.A.P. appeared to have some insight into his problems and pro-social attitudes.

The sentencing judge concluded that a youth sentence was appropriate for the following reasons: (1) the offence was very much a product of the dysfunctional family background and J.A.P.'s dependency and reduced level of maturity; (2) J.A.P. was very young at the time of the offence; (3) J.A.P. was twenty-three years old at the time of sentencing and had not significantly re-offended; and (4) while J.A.P. needed further counselling and insight into his behaviour, he was a reasonable candidate to successfully complete a program of rehabilitation. R. v. J.J.H., 2010 MBQB 177 (CanLII)

Although decided well after D.B., the sentencing Court did not approach the task with the two-pronged test.

J.J.H. pled guilty to two counts of second degree murder. He was fourteen years old when he shot and killed his adoptive mother and adoptive five-year-old sister, who happened upon the murder of their mother. The Court concluded that a youth sentence was appropriate because J.J.H. was very young at the time of the offence and he was striking back at a situation that had been building in him since his very early years.

J.J.H.'s birth mother was reported to have been involved in the sex trade and J.J.H. was given over to his birth father to raise. His birth father suffered from substance abuse issues. After his birth father was arrested for homicide, J.J.H. was placed in foster care and then adopted when he was three years old. The adoption report indicated "there were frequent changes in care providers and that there had been severe physical abuse".

J.J.H.'s relationship with his adoptive parents was strained and, in particular, J.J.H. and his adoptive mother did not get along. There was evidence that J.J.H.'s adoptive mother would erupt into rages, had been violent with J.J.H., would threaten to send J.J.H. back to Child and Family Services, and would threaten to kill him if he did not behave. In sum, J.J.H. suffered regular physical and emotional abuse from his adoptive mother.

J.J.H. was diagnosed with Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, Reactive Attachment Disorder, and narcissistic personality organization. One of the doctors stated J.J.H.'s emotional repertoire was negative with anxiety, insecurity and anger as a result of growing up in an angry, chronically dangerous and frightening home environment. The two doctors who assessed J.J.H. concluded that he struck back in rage on the day of the murders. R. v. A.A., 2011 ABQB 598 (CanLII)

Although decided well after D.B., the Court did not undertake the two-pronged approach.

A.A. was convicted of first degree murder in the death of his uncle, a major cocaine dealer. The Court concluded that a youth sentence was appropriate.

A.A. was seventeen years old at the time of the murder. He lived with and helped his uncle in the cocaine business. A.A.'s uncle kicked A.A. out of his residence because he thought A.A. had stolen cocaine from him. In the evening leading up to the murder, A.A. removed a substantial quantity of drugs and cash from his uncle's residence. While at his residence, he later fired seven shots at his uncle, three of which hit his body and killed him.

A.A. did not have a prior criminal record but had a past in the drug trade. He came from a troubled background. His mother pursued a lifestyle of risk in a tumultuous relationship with his father who had a serious criminal record. A.A. did not have a pro‑social, supportive family.

At twenty-one years old, A.A. was working on credits to complete his high school diploma. He was described by one instructor as a responsible student. He had a history of anxiety and depression. R. v. B.L., 2013 MBQB 89 (CanLII)

When B.L. was sixteen years old, he led a home invasion robbery, and less than a month later, while on bail, mugged a woman on the street. The Court found that the Crown had rebutted the presumption.

B.L. was assessed as being of borderline to low average intelligence and to be at a grade two to three level for reading and grade three to four level for mathematics. His childhood home was dysfunctional and he was neglected. However, at the time of the offence his home life had improved significantly.

The Court found that the circumstances of the robberies demonstrated B.L. had the moral capacity of an adult. The home invasion was planned and B.L. was the leader of the robbers. Before and during the offences, B.L. demonstrated independent judgment and foresight. While his cognitive abilities were limited, he understood society's values. He made the choice to pursue a criminal lifestyle in that he wanted to be a gangster and wanted to lead criminal associates. R. v. Sinclair and Murdock (19 March 2015), Winnipeg YO 13-01-32621 (Man. Q.B.)
 

Sinclair and Murdock were found guilty of second degree murder. They had previously entered guilty pleas to assault with a weapon in relation to a second victim during the same event. The Court concluded that the Crown had rebutted the presumption.

Sinclair and Murdock were fifteen years old when they were at a drinking party. When Sinclair went out to buy more supplies for the party, he saw a group of people in a backyard. One of these people said something about belonging to a street gang (the Indian Posse) that was a rival of the gang to which Sinclair was affiliated (the Warriors).

Later that night, Sinclair and Murdock decided to arm themselves and go back to find the Indian Posse group. The members of the Indian Posse fled, leaving a young, pregnant woman alone in the backyard. 
Sinclair and Murdock attacked her; however, she survived. When her father came out to rescue her, Sinclair and Murdock attacked him with a baseball bat, breaking or fracturing virtually every bone in his head and killing him.

In concluding that the presumption had been rebutted, the sentencing judge noted that the offence was particularly horrendous, there was a degree of planning the attack by securing weapons and returning to the backyard, and there was a gang element to the crime. He also noted that Sinclair and Murdock had prior criminal records under the youth court system. They had been in receipt of all the youth court system had to offer, to no avail. R. v. Okemow, 2017 MBCA 59, 2017 CarswellMan 288 (WL Can) (C.A.)

Okemow pled guilty to fourteen offences that occurred when he was fourteen years old. The most serious of the offences related to two armed robberies. The Court of Appeal upheld the sentencing judge's decision that the presumption had been rebutted.

Okemow had been diagnosed with Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder ("FASD") and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder ("ADHD"). While the sentencing judge took that into account, she found that the presumption had been rebutted because Okemow had demonstrated a pattern of violent behaviour where he was the "instigator or leader" in the offences, he had a prior criminal record in which the violence continued to escalate, and the offences in question involved some degree of planning.

The sentencing judge concluded, and the Court of Appeal agreed, that in light of all the other considerations, Okemow should not receive a youth sentence simply because of his cognitive limitations. R. v. McClements, 2017 MBCA 104 (CanLII)

McClements pled guilty to second degree murder. In the middle of an afternoon, he shot a stranger twice in the back. The Court of Appeal upheld the sentencing judge's decision that the presumption had been rebutted.

McClements was seventeen years four months old at the time of the offence. He was a member of a street gang. 
He was carrying a loaded semi-automatic handgun with a silencer. He had no criminal record at the time of the offence.

The Court of Appeal noted that McClements did not suffer from any cognitive or emotional disability that would prevent him from appreciating the moral consequences of his actions. The Court also noted that the sentencing judge found that McClements was "functioning at a level of independence and maturity beyond his years" at the time of the offence (see para. 64).

The Court of Appeal found that based on McClements' "age at the time of the offence, his independent lifestyle living as an adult at the time of the offence, his choice to associate with a street gang and engage in a criminal lifestyle, his choice to carry a semi-automatic gun and his crime of violence and high risk taking", the Crown rebutted the presumption (see para. 65). R. v. M.W., 2017 ONCA 22 (CanLII)

Two young offenders were convicted of first degree murder in the execution-style killing of another youth. The presumption had not been rebutted for either offender.

With regard to one of the two young offenders ("T.F."), the Court considered that he had various disorders, a learning disability, witnessed his mother suffer violence at the hands of his stepfather, and had been suspended from school fifteen times. The Court also noted that his early involvement in the criminal justice system could be viewed as demonstrative of his ignoring society's norms. T.F. lived in a community of disadvantaged youth and was influenced by anti-social peers. Despite these challenges, he did very well while in custody. He was described as task-oriented, focused and highly motivated. He graduated from high school while in custody and had completed some college courses. He also completed programming.

The Court noted that the evolution of T.F.'s maturity while in custody highlighted the lesser degree of T.F.'s maturity at the time of the offence. The Court was not satisfied that the Crown had rebutted the presumption.

As for the second young offender ("M.W."), the Court also concluded that the Crown had not rebutted the presumption.

M.W. was not present when the murder took place. M.W.'s role was to relay key information to another and help implement the plan. After the shooting, M.W. participated in diverting suspicion onto other individuals. He was not a leader in the offence.

M.W.'s father suffered from addictions, and he abused M.W.'s mother. M.W. was diagnosed with ADHD; however, he refused to take medication. He was susceptible to negative peer influences and belonged to the same anti-social group as T.F. He was suspended from school nineteen times, and he had a prior criminal record.

The Court concluded that the actions M.W. took in the murder did not show a level of moral maturity or judgment beyond that of an adolescent. His conduct was immature, impulsive and ill-considered. R. v. P.H., 2017 BCSC 1105 (CanLII)

P.H. was convicted of second degree murder. 
He and others planned to rob someone who had advertised a cell phone and watch for sale online. They arranged a place to meet with the seller. However, the seller did not show up. While the others began to leave, P.H. waited. When a completely innocent bystander walked past, P.H. hit him in the head with a baseball bat. When he fell, P.H. hit him two more times. The Court held that the Crown had not rebutted the presumption.

P.H. was sixteen years eight months old at the time of the offence and in grade eleven. He had a stable family life and upbringing. He did not have a prior criminal record.

P.H. was diagnosed with ADHD, and the forensic assessment described he had difficulty controlling his anger; however, he was cognitively mature, socially appropriate with reasonable intelligence.

The sentencing judge accepted one doctor's conclusion that P.H. seemed to have acted impulsively, that impulsivity is a central component of ADHD and it was heightened by the impulsivity that is normative of adolescent experience.

The sentencing judge concluded that P.H.'s conduct showed immaturity and impulsiveness rather than the insight into the wrongdoing of a more mature, reflective or considered adult. R. v. Anderson, 2018 MBCA 42 (CanLII)

Anderson, who was sixteen years old, pled guilty to the second degree murder of a cognitively challenged teenager. The Court of Appeal described the murder as horrific: Anderson followed the victim after having sexual intercourse with her, attacked her from behind and bludgeoned her to death with a rock because he did not want her to tell anyone they had had sex. The Court of Appeal upheld the sentencing judge's decision that the Crown had rebutted the presumption.

In considering moral blameworthiness, the Court stated the circumstances of the murder and its immediate cover-up reasonably dispelled a presumption that this was the action of an individual with heightened vulnerability, less maturity and a reduced capacity for moral judgment (see D.B. at para. 41). The Court of Appeal considered the following: •


 
The decision to murder was based on the exercise of judgment and a foresight of the long-term consequences of what would occur to the young person's reputation if it was revealed he was having sex with the victim (see para. 49). •


 
The significant and brutal violence was then intentionally inflicted on a defenseless and vulnerable individual (see para. 49). •


 
The actions were also the product of a sober individual who lacked any form of cognitive limitation (see para. 49). •


 
During the commission of the murder, the young person had the presence of mind to consider whether he might leave handprints on the murder weapon if he held it in a certain way (see para. 49). •


 
It was also relevant for the Court to consider the young person's post-offence conduct to cover up his involvement immediately after the murder up to and including his first interview by police five days after the offence (see para. 50).

The Court of Appeal also considered that the reports filed indicated Anderson was functioning as a normal adolescent. R. v. N.A., a.k.a. N.T-S., 2018 MBQB 93 (CanLII)

N.A. was convicted of manslaughter. On the day of the offence, he obtained a knife in anticipation his friend would need it if there was a confrontation with the deceased. The Court found that the presumption had been rebutted.[1]

The deceased ran across the street to confront the friend and N.A. chased after them. N.A. stabbed the deceased once and immediately fled from the scene. He lied to his mother about what had happened, slashed his arm to make it look like he acted in self-defence, and continued those lies for several hours when interviewed by the police.

N.A. was three months shy of his eighteenth birthday at the time of the offence and had no prior criminal record. He was raised in a good family, completed grade twelve, and had completed some online university courses by the time of his sentencing. The pre-sentence report stated he expressed empathy towards the deceased's family and took full responsibility for his actions. R. v. F. (J.M.), 2020 MBQB 161 (CanLII)

J.M.F. was convicted of first degree murder, having arranged an encounter with the deceased and then shooting him in the head. He was three months shy of his seventeenth birthday at the time of the offence. The Court held that the presumption had been rebutted.

J.M.F. had been diagnosed with ADHD, Oppositional Defiant Disorder, and mild Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. A report filed at the sentencing hearing also noted that J.M.F. exhibited some symptoms consistent with Autism Spectrum Disorder. Despite these diagnoses, the forensic assessment concluded that J.M.F. did not present as someone with significant cognitive or learning difficulties. He had high scores in word reading and math computation. His maturity level was commensurate with his age.

J.M.F. had a prior criminal record that included violence, and he was on probation at the time of the murder.

The sentencing judge considered that: the murder was not spontaneous; J.M.F. showed foresight in acquiring a rifle and ammunition; he orchestrated the circumstances of the offence; after the murder, he took steps to conceal his involvement (including an attempt to tell a witness what to say at trial); and he came from a loving home with the support of several family members. The sentencing judge also considered that the forensic assessment concluded that J.M.F. did not have significant cognitive or learning difficulties and showed a level of maturity that was commensurate with his age. R. v. M. (H.), 2022 MBPC 42 (CanLII)

H.M. pled guilty to manslaughter. He was seventeen years seven months old at the time of the offence. Without provocation, he stabbed a stranger six times. The Court found that the presumption had not been rebutted.

H.M. was an Indigenous young man whose life had been significantly impacted by the traumas of residential schools and colonialism. He had been diagnosed with FASD and ADHD and had extremely low cognitive functioning. He was described as a "vulnerable individual with limited capacity to organize himself and manage his own behaviour", according to the assessments provided (see para. 1).

The sentencing judge found that the evidence supporting H.M.'s reduced moral blameworthiness was overwhelming. She considered that the act was impulsive and unplanned. H.M.'s moral blameworthiness was further reduced because of his FASD, his low cognitive functioning, and the circumstances of his life as an Indigenous person. The sentencing judge found that H.M. was incapable of planning, controlling his impulses, or having a healthy, pro-social life.



 


 1.

 Circumstances of the Offence

The seriousness of the offence is a factor I must consider; however, it does not, in itself, lead to the conclusion that an adult sentence should be imposed. What is most relevant at this stage is the level of moral judgment or sophistication demonstrated in the planning and implementation of the offence, and A.K.B.'s role in carrying out the offence. See M.W. at para. 112.

For the reasons outlined in the "Facts" section above, there is no doubt the offence was extremely violent and brutal. 
A.K.B. was the sole person responsible for the offence.

This case is different from almost all the cases provided in that there is no clear motive or explanation for the offence. All I can garner from the evidence is that in the months leading up to the murder, L.D. put a lot of responsibilities on A.K.B., including cooking, cleaning and shopping. L.D. was demanding and the Crown described her relationship with A.K.B. as "suffocating".

In almost all the cases provided, there were much clearer explanations for the offences such as gang involvement[2], cognitive impairments[3], and/or childhood abuse and neglect[4]. I remain mindful, however, there is no onus on A.K.B. to provide an explanation for the offence.

A.K.B. submits that the motive evidence I do have demonstrates a lack of adult-like or mature judgment and thinking. 
Had he been thinking like an adult, A.K.B. would have instead made a mature decision such as a choice to move out of his mother's home to escape the responsibilities imposed upon him there.

The Crown relies heavily on A.K.B.'s post-offence conduct to rebut the presumption: A.K.B. attempted to clean up the murder scene with bleach; he disposed of the murder weapon; he appeared calm while running errands; he took extra time to run errands at multiple locations; he sent texts to his mother while running errands; and he attempted to divert suspicion onto another suspect (C.L.) right from the time of the 9-1-1 call and his interview with police.

A.K.B. urges me to give no weight to the post-offence conduct because he says it is his moral culpability at the exact time of the killing that must be considered.

I cannot agree. While it is just one factor to consider, the Manitoba Court of Appeal, in Anderson, has clearly stated a young person's post-offence conduct to cover up a crime is relevant:
 In the consideration of whether adult-like judgement was exercised, it is also relevant to consider the young person's post-offence conduct to cover up his involvement immediately after the murder up to and including his first interview by police five days later. It has long been a sentencing principle that an offender's attitude after the commission of the crime sheds light on his or her degree of criminality and character (see Regina v Iwaniw (1959), 1959 CanLII 622 (MB CA), 127 CCC 40 at 51 (Man CA)).
 Callous behaviour to a victim post-offence or attempting to cover up the commission of an offence may support a finding of a heightened degree of moral blameworthiness. Here, the lack of panic and display of self-assuredness by the young person after the initial blow and his successful efforts to cover up the murder and hide from detection in the small community was evidence which was open to the judge to accept as demonstrating heightened moral blameworthiness or culpability. In my view, the record here surrounding the circumstances of the offence reasonably supports a finding that the young person displayed "critical thinking" in carrying out the murder with the intention of successfully completing it and attempting to avoid detection for it. [citations omitted]






 2.

 A.K.B.'s Circumstances
 
A.K.B. has no prior criminal record. All the material provided shows him to be very intelligent and capable. The forensic reports show he does not have intellectual, emotional or psychological detriments. There were fifty-one letters of support from family and friends filed at the sentencing hearing, which all spoke to A.K.B.'s good character.
 
At the time of the offence, A.K.B. was in high school and achieving very good grades. He also worked part time at McDonald's where he was a valued employee.
 
A.K.B.'s parents separated when he was three years old and thereafter they shared custody. At the time of the offence, A.K.B. spent half-time with his mother and half-time with his father, stepmother and half-sister. His family life was healthy, and they spent a lot of time together doing pro-social activities. A.K.B. did not pay rent or pay bills. He would borrow a parent's car when needed. From the evidence at trial, it appears he was mainly dependent on his parents for the necessities of life.
 
A.K.B. did not experience or witness substance abuse, violence, or sexual abuse in either parent's home. He described to the pre-sentence report writer that he had a great relationship with his mother. He said he also had a positive relationship with his father.
 
From the evidence at trial, there is no suggestion that A.K.B. had gang or otherwise anti-social affiliations. 
To the contrary, the sentencing material filed speaks to a young person who did not consume alcohol or drugs, and played video games with friends, and played sports before suffering concussions. IV.
 CONCLUSION
 
It greatly concerns me that there is no clear evidence of why A.K.B. committed this horrible crime. This unknown factor makes it much more difficult for me to assess moral blameworthiness. 
There is no doubt that motives or explanations such as those described in the cases above provide insight into the maturity level and moral blameworthiness of the offenders. However, there is no onus on A.K.B. to provide such an explanation. The onus to rebut the presumption must remain on the Crown.
 
The offence was extremely violent and A.K.B.'s post-offence conduct appeared to be calm and cool. It was not established that A.K.B. planned and deliberated over the murder, hence the jury's verdict of second degree murder. By all accounts L.D. was not abusing or otherwise neglecting A.K.B.
 
A.K.B. was not living independently; he was not acting on behalf of or in concert with gang activity; this was not an offence that was part of a string or pattern of offences; and A.K.B. does not have a record of escalating criminal or violent behaviour. To the contrary, other than this crime, the evidence before me demonstrates he was a normal high school teenager who was largely dependent on his parents and was a pro‑social member of the community.
 
From the evidence, the only possible explanation for the crime was the household demands L.D. put upon A.K.B. 
The mature response would have been to decide to move out; the immature and unreasoned response was killing L.D.
 
For all the reasons set out above, I am not satisfied that the Crown has rebutted the presumption. To summarize: •


 
A.K.B. was young, as he was only sixteen years old. •


 
A.K.B. was not functioning independently, outside his family homes. •


 
A.K.B. was dependent on his parents. •


 
The offence was an impulsive, ill-considered act that showed a lack of maturity. •


 
The offence itself did not demonstrate sophistication.
 
I acknowledge that the post-offence conduct shows a level of sophistication and composure; however, when I consider that factor with all the other circumstances, I cannot find that the Crown has shown a sufficient level of moral blameworthiness to hold A.K.B. accountable as an adult.
 
Given that conclusion, I do not have to consider whether a YCJA sentence is sufficient to hold A.K.B. accountable. V.

THE SENTENCE
 
A youth sentence of seven years is imposed.
 
Four years of that sentence are to be served in custody with no credit for A.K.B.'s time in pre-trial or pre-sentence custody. The balance of the sentence is to be served in the community and be subject to supervision.
 
I invite counsel to make submissions about the conditions that should be imposed as part of the conditional supervision.
 
Lastly, the following orders will be made:
